81

Characteristics of the
Social Entrepreneur
6.1	 Objectives of the Chapter – 82
6.2	 Introduction – 82
6.3	 Social Entrepreneur, Particularities,
and Differences That Make Them an Agent
of Change – 83
6.4	 Challenges Faced by Social Entrepreneurs – 85
6.5	 Types of Social Entrepreneurs – 86
6.6	 Leadership in Social Enterprises: The Need
for Change as the Enterprise Grows Up – 90
6.7	 Conclusions – 92
6.8	 Exercise – 93
6.9	 Additional Resources – 94
References – 94

© The Author(s) 2019
L. Portales, Social Innovation and Social Entrepreneurship,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-13456-3_6

6

82

Chapter 6 · Characteristics of the Social Entrepreneur

6.1  Objectives of the Chapter

6

5 Define and differentiate between a traditional entrepreneur
and a social entrepreneur.
5 List and understand the challenges faced by a social entrepreneur.
5 Explain each of the different types of social entrepreneurs that
exist.
5 Recognize each of the stages of a social enterprise, depending on the styles of leadership required and the type of social
entrepreneur.
5 Analyze a social enterprise based on the profile of the social
entrepreneur and the style of leadership required.
6.2  Introduction

Social entrepreneurship is the process by which social enterprises seek to address a social problem innovatively and sustainably changing the social and economic structures that gave rise to
it. However, to achieve, it is necessary to have an agent of change,
aware of this problem, and with the interest of carrying out an
action that transforms the context or the conditions that make
them arise or prevail.
This agent of change is known as a social entrepreneur, which
shares qualities and similarities with the traditional entrepreneur.
However, the nature of entrepreneurship and motivations makes
them have particularities that are important to take into consideration for analysis and understanding. Sometimes these particularities are related to the type of social enterprise they wish to develop,
but in most cases, they are common to all of them.
In the same way, as in traditional ventures, the social entrepreneur has a series of characteristics, skills, and competencies to take
their business to success. Some of these characteristics are innate,
while others must be developed over time and during the process
of implementation of the company.
Based on this context, this chapter aims to present the profile
of social entrepreneurs, as well as the skills and competencies they
develop to have a social enterprise considered to be successful. It
also exposes the different types of social entrepreneurs that exist
and the roles that each of them plays according to the life cycle of
the social enterprise.
The chapter has five sections. The first exposes a description
of the general characteristics of a social entrepreneur. The second
section presents an analysis of the challenges faced by the social
entrepreneur when carrying out his social enterprise. The third
shows the different types of social entrepreneurs, as well as the
roles they play in each of them. The fourth section presents the
kind of leadership that a social entrepreneur must develop in each
of the stages of their social entrepreneurship until they become
consolidated within the ecosystem. The fifth section presents
reflections, by way of conclusion of the chapter.

6.3 · Social Entrepreneur, Particularities, and Differences …

6.3  Social Entrepreneur, Particularities,

and Differences That Make Them an Agent
of Change

Social entrepreneurs are like other entrepreneurs, with the difference that their motivation is social impact and not money (Tracey
& Phillips, 2007). They are agents committed to making a difference for the world, driven by social objectives, which have the
characteristic of improving the living conditions of other people.
To achieve their purpose, they decide to carry out a social enterprise that, like any other business, should not incur losses, but
obtaining dividends from these companies is not the motivation
that drives them (Yunus, 2006).
Social entrepreneurs face the same challenges as traditional
entrepreneurs: the recognition of opportunities, the allocation
of resources, and the creation of a new company, with the added
complexity of the achievement of social results.
Although there is no agreed definition of social entrepreneur,
all agree on the importance of the social value proposition, that
is, the objective of the entrepreneur is to solve a social problem
(Nicholls, 2013). Therefore, a social entrepreneur is that individual
who tries to address or alleviate a social problem with an innovative business approach. Successful social entrepreneurs reflect the
characteristics of successful commercial entrepreneurs, but require
an extra dose of visionary ideas, leadership skills and a commitment to help others (Mair, Battilana, & Cardenas, 2012). They are
people who realize that there is an opportunity to satisfy some
unmet need, gathering the necessary resources to make a difference. Positioning it as catalysts for social transformation (Waddock & Post, 1991).
Within the personal characteristics that distinguish the social
entrepreneur is his mentality (Light, 2005), which takes into
consideration two aspects. The first is the social sensitivity and
motivation they have to carry out their entrepreneurship. This
mentality reflects that social entrepreneurs are ambitious, have
a mission, are strategic, have resources, and are results oriented
(Sastre-Castillo, Peris-Ortiz, & Danvila-Del Valle, 2015). The second aspect is the risk aberration that usually carry out its venture,
but also its ability to learn their first implementations, that is, they
show the willingness to self-correct and modify the plans, adjust
the details, and overcome barriers (Marshall, 2011). They admit
mistakes.
Motivation is another characteristic that defines social entrepreneur (Grassl, 2012; Yunus, 2006). In most of them, there is a
point of inflection or the awareness of a lack of compliance with
some right or injustice, being the necessary stimulus to decide to
take action to solve the diagnosed social problem. The ability to
recognize opportunities when analyzing any problem complemented this motivation. Through the understanding of the social
problem visualizes the potential to transform the social conditions
that generate it. Social entrepreneurs recognize the complexity of

83

6

84

6

Chapter 6 · Characteristics of the Social Entrepreneur

social issues and develop a systematic vision for the issue, identifying the effects and causes that create it, the relevance of their
attention, and the need to make collaboration from interdependent actors.
The social entrepreneur is an individual with significant
personal credibility, which it uses to take advantage of critical
resources (Waddock & Post, 1991). His history generates a distinctive profile of beliefs and values, a fact that contributes to the
formation of his personality but also to give meaning to the work
he does. This history and credibility generate a commitment of
the followers with the project, framing it regarding social values,
instead of economic benefits, which results in the sense of collective purpose between the social entrepreneur and those who join
the project. Social entrepreneurs have an ethical impulse, where
money is only a tool to boost their programs and make projects
progress.
Another characteristic is their ability to act and cross disciplinary boundaries, bringing together people from diverse backgrounds who can work together to create a solution. In this sense,
they are willing to free themselves from the established structures
and to create new ones according to the needs to generate a new
social equilibrium. Their ability to act and develop relationships
for social transformation, lead them to share the credit with other
actors. Sometimes, social entrepreneurs are willing to work quietly
in the background.
The social entrepreneur sustains the achievement of a social
mission above or in parity with financial success (Alter, 2006;
Marshall, 2011; Waddock & Post, 1991; Yunus, 2006). So, one of
its characteristics is the fact that the growth of the company is a
positive result, providing an enhancement of the social problem.
Social entrepreneurs produce measurable returns, these results
transform existing realities, open new paths for the marginalized
and disadvantaged and unlock the potential of society to enable
social change.
The search for a double type of value is a characteristic of the
social entrepreneur, considering the social and economic objectives in simultaneous (Austin, Gutierrez, Ogliastri, & Reficco,
2006). Social entrepreneurs often occupy market niches by offering
products and services that satisfy basic needs and that are not provided by the public or private sector, such as those related to social
assistance and traditionally subordinated to the State. Although
they also compete in traditional markets where they compete with
the products and services of traditional companies, increasing
the tension between the generation of social and economic value
(Vázquez-Maguirre & Portales, 2018).
It is important to mention that, although social entrepreneurs
almost always define themselves as individuals because is easier
to find and visualize, there are social entrepreneurships that arises
from social groups, citizen groups, networks, organizations, or
even communities. This type of experience is presented mainly in
the School of Social Economy, in which the community promoted
above the individual, even when there is individual leadership that

6.4 · Challenges Faced by Social Entrepreneurs

drives the initiatives. So, a social entrepreneur is an individual,
group, network, organization, community, or alliance of organizations that seek a sustainable change on a large scale through innovative ideas to solve significant social problems, to the instead they
use market mechanisms.
6.4  Challenges Faced by Social Entrepreneurs

The dual mission faced by social entrepreneurs at the moment of
launching their ventures results in the facing of particular challenges, which would hardly be faced by a traditional entrepreneur.
These challenges are of an individual type as well as an organizational type, and in some cases, a social one. Their attention favors
the success of the social enterprise, however, due to the nature of
the entrepreneur, sometimes not usually taken into consideration
at the time of undertaking.
On a personal level, the social entrepreneur has an intrinsic
motivation related to the problem it wishes to address, which is
usually linked to some life history, considered as the tipping point
that led him to be an agent of change. By focusing on the problem as the starting point of the change process, they tend to forget to generate market mechanisms aimed at satisfying the needs
of customers or consumers in a competitive way (Dey & Teasdale,
2013). This situation places them in what of innovation, leaving
aside how to carry it out, being its principal interest to address
social problems through new ideas and not necessarily the generation of economic value. The challenge is to strengthen the use
of high-performance management practices, such as continuous
improvement, quality management, financial controls, and a general focus on accountability, increasing the possibility of early success.
Accountability is often a complicated issue for social enterprises. By assuming a social mission, social entrepreneurs create
relationships with vulnerable groups or sectors, which must be
taken into account and establish bridges of dialogue with them
during the creation of the company and developing its strategy
(Tracey & Phillips, 2007). Social entrepreneurs require a set of
competencies that allow them to create and manage these relationships, as they are a crucial element in providing the legitimacy
they need. Finding this balance in relationship management is
complicated, because social entrepreneurs need to create profitable businesses based on competitive products and services, and the
process of consulting with stakeholders could impede competitiveness and slow decision making.
Another challenge faced by social enterprises is the tension
between social and commercial objectives (Vázquez-Maguirre
& Portales, 2018). The types of tension experienced depend on
the nature of the company and the costs of the social mission.
The most obvious thing is that difficult decisions must be made
regarding the priorities of the organization and investment strategies; however, sometimes the decision is focused on investing in

85

6

86

6

Chapter 6 · Characteristics of the Social Entrepreneur

the attention of the social problems, putting at risk the operational
sustainability of the company or vice versa. The challenge for the
entrepreneur is to reach the right balance between investing in
the income generating part of the company or invest in the part
responsible for achieving social results.
Social entrepreneurs also present the challenge of breaking the
dichotomy or silo presented by social and economic job (Tracey &
Phillips, 2007). Entrepreneurs, who have experience in the social
sector, have difficulties to identify the commercial part of the business; while those entrepreneurs with experience in traditional
companies may have difficulty identifying the company’s social
approach. Although this situation appears with greater force in the
social entrepreneur, it also exists in employees and volunteers of
the social enterprise.
Finally, the primary challenge faced by a social entrepreneur
when the company’s operation begins is to operate beyond the
equilibrium point. When the entrepreneur has achieved this situation, he has graduated from the business world, with the possibility of expanding its impact (Yunus, 2006). He has overcome
financial dependence, moving the world of philanthropy to the
business world.
6.5  Types of Social Entrepreneurs

So far, the review has not mentioned explicitly the fact that not all
social entrepreneurs are equal, that is, the context in which they
develop, their life history and the problems they wish to address,
define the type of entrepreneur they want or must to be. In this
context, the proposal developed by Zahra, Gedajlovic, Neubaum,
and Shulman (2009) considers three different types of social entrepreneur: social bricoleur, social builder, and social engineer. These
types of social entrepreneurs can be classified from low to high,
depending on the type of impact or social transformation they can
achieve (. Fig. 6.1.).
The bricoleur social entrepreneur has a local or tacit knowledge, using its resources and repertoires to carry out the tasks on
day-to-day basis. It involves the combination of existing resources
to solve problems and take advantage of new opportunities (Di
Domenico, Haugh, & Tracey, 2010). This entrepreneur has an intimate knowledge of the local environmental conditions and the
resources available locally. It attends to locally discovered opportunities with locally available resources.
This type of social entrepreneur identifies social needs that can
be indiscernible or unrecognizable by other actors. The solutions
they design are sometimes small in scale and limited in scope.
However, these solutions help to mitigate local social problems.
Social bricoleurs contribute to the generation of a social equilibrium where peace and social order exist. As a consequence of it
localized and often implicit knowledge, social bricoleurs are in a
unique position to discover local social needs where they can take
advantage of their motivation, experience, and personal resources

87

6.5 · Types of Social Entrepreneurs

Social Engineer
Social builder
Social bricoleur
•Local impact based
on tacit knowledge
of the context and
local problems that
you wish to
address.

. Fig. 6.1

•Systemic change
based on the
identification of
opportunities
arising from a
social problem .

•Social
transformation of
the structures and
institutions that
maintain a global
problem.

Types of social entrepreneurs according to the type of impact they can achieve (Source Author)

to create and improve social wealth (Zahra et al., 2009). Although
they are not as advertised as other entrepreneurs, social bricoleurs
perform essential social functions throughout the world.
Their work is so subtle that they resist recognition or even
exposure by governments and the media. They are less concerned
about the scaling up of their initiatives, so that organizations that
seek this element within a social enterprise may not appreciate the
contributions of the social bricoleur.
Case 6.1. Bárbara Diego and Her Effort to Dignify the Elderly Through Gericare
Bárbara Diego’s interest in
dignifying older adults started
from her home; she lived with
her family. For more than
20 years, his family lived with a
dependent older adult without
knowing that the cause of his
diminished mental capacity
was Alzheimer’s. They traveled
to the USA for treatment, then
her husband died and so did
her daughter, both uncharged
to take care of her. Then she
knew that she wanted to do
something. She offered therapy
for six years to seniors and their
families. During those years,
Barbara met Ana Sustiel, her
business partner, who also
worked as a psychologist for the
elderly and families for a long
time. They shared a passion
for learning, which led them to
study together with a Master
in Psychotherapy. Later, they
began to teach courses for
families with patients diagnosed
with dementia and, through
their experience, they identified

the insufficiency of the current
models of attention to adults
in the fourth age, giving rise to
Gericare.
Gericare is a gerontology service
center with an innovative model
for Mexico. It is different from
the model of traditional care
homes and asylums, where the
elderly stayed for the rest of their
lives. The model has three units.
The first is a care center for the
elderly, with modern equipment,
located in the Central Business
District of San Pedro Garza
García. This place was meant for
the elderly to feel enthusiastic
about visiting and spending
time with others, learning to feel
comfortable with themselves
again. To achieve it, the Day
Club Program was established,
which operates on three axes:
(1) cognitive stimulation, (2)
physical development, and
(3) playful-social integration.
The second unit is home care
through personal assistants
certified in treatment and care

for the elderly. The third unit is
the Gericare Services Network,
a free service that provides
information and knowledge
to family members of senior
citizens about their care and
the importance of being close
to them.
Nearly ten years after its
founding, Gericare provides
services to seniors, in a Mexican
context where the problems
represented by this sector have
not been addressed and taken
into account. The model has
proved its validity regarding the
market, at the level of improving
the living conditions of their
patients and their integration
with society. However, its
impact is limited by the lack of
awareness at the national level
of the implications that the
care of the elderly will have in
the medium term, especially
in a country where the youth
demographic bonus begin to
disappear.

6

88

6

Chapter 6 · Characteristics of the Social Entrepreneur

The second type of social entrepreneur is the builder, characterized by its ability to identify opportunities within the market or
society to build and introduce systemic changes, both at the level
of ends and means. By introducing innovations, entrepreneurs
successfully and profitably take advantage of opportunities to
address the unmet needs of customers (Waddock & Post, 1991).
Builders social entrepreneurs identify needs that are not being
adequately met by companies or by the State to offer a good or
service that radically changes the way to satisfy this need (Zahra
et al., 2009).
These entrepreneurs build and operate social enterprises that
meet the needs of segments and populations that traditional companies have forgotten, either due to a lack of incentives or the way
in which they do not address the causes that generate the problem,
serving as a palliative to this situation (Chell, Nicolopoulou, &
Karataş-Özkan, 2010). These social entrepreneurs are alert to the
opportunities offered by a specific problem and decide to carry out
an innovative action to address it.
These entrepreneurs develop organizations that match the
scale and scope of the social needs they seek to address, usually transcend the local level and reach an international level
(Barki, Comini, Cunliffe, Hart, & Rai, 2015). Unlike bricoleurs
who improvise solutions to local social problems on a small
scale, social builders seek to remedy broader social problems by
planning and developing scalable solutions formalized or systematized to meet growing needs. Their models could be transferred to other contexts, increasing their impact. The advantages
of these entrepreneurs do not come from local knowledge; they
result from their unique ability to detect and take advantage of
those opportunities that generate social wealth by creating and
reconfiguring the processes enacted to deliver goods and services.
While social builders may face limited competition in the
delivery of their solutions, competition for resources is often
intense, as they require significant funding to create the vast and
complex organizations needed to achieve the desired impact.
Governments, NGOs, and charitable foundations are the traditional sources of financing for these entrepreneurs. Acquiring
resources through collaborative companies often helps social
builders to build, maintain, and grow their organizations. However, the diversity of financing can also restrict or even alter their
missions.
Social builders often have to develop and refine a capacity to
raise funds, possibly diverting their attention from their primary
mission. The need to be part of the staff of the organization can
also influence the fate of this mission as professional employees,
and volunteers begin to exercise control over its operations, strategies, and activities (Zahra et al., 2009). The need to acquire substantial resources also presents social builders with a paradox in
the management and maintenance of its organizations.

89

6.5 · Types of Social Entrepreneurs

Case 6.2. Algramo from the Neighborhood to the World, an Intelligent Solution by José Manuel Moller
While José Manuel Moller
studied Commercial Engineering
at the Universidad Católica
of Chile, he went to live in a
town in the commune of La
Granja with three friends. As
they studied and worked,
they had low incomes, which
forced them to buy what they
needed for day to day in small
formats. José Manuel realized
that buying in the store in his
neighborhood; he pays much
more than if he bought in bigger
formats. Looking for a solution
to this situation, José Manuel
founds Algramo. The original
idea was to create a machine
that would bulk off the amount
the customer wanted to buy,
in order to pay a wholesale
price for a small amount. These
machines would be installed in
warehouses since it is in these
places where the problem
occurs most frequently.
In April 2013, Algramo began
with the stage of development
of the final dispensing machines.
After a while, Algramo installed
the first powder detergent
dispensing machines. From the
neighborhood, Algramo gains
strength, giving rise to the

constitution of a voluntary Board
of Directors and chosen as the
best Latin American project of
Start-Up Chile, 7th Generation
and winner of the Open Start-Up
of UDD Ventures. For 2014,
Algramo certified as Company
B and implemented a sales
system that does not involve
the dispensing machine and
thus does not depend on the
manufacturing time of these. A
system of manual sale is created
using returnable containers,
equal to that of beverages,
maintaining the logic of sale in
bulk. Families buy, consume the
product, and return with the
same packaging for their next
purchase.
In 2015, the B certification
recognized it as the best
company for the world and
the best company for the
community. Fast Company
magazine selected Algramo as
one of the 50 most innovative
companies worldwide. In
2016, the transition from
Entrepreneurship to Social
Enterprise was consolidated,
with the birth of Operations,
Sustainability, Human
Resources, Communications,

The last type of social entrepreneur is the engineer. This entrepreneur introduces dramatic changes in the social sphere, which
resemble what great entrepreneurs in the world of commercial
companies (e.g., Steve Jobs, UBER, among others). They are the
engines of innovation and change, destroying obsolete systems,
structures, and processes replacing it by newer and more appropriate ones (Martin & Osberg, 2007). By fracturing existing and often
dominant institutions and replacing them with more socially efficient ones, social engineers can have a profound influence on society. These entrepreneurs can have high strength for social change.
Given the “systemic” nature of the problems, social engineers
often attack national, transnational, or global social problems. The
revolutionary and ideological nature of the reforms they introduce
is often a threat to the interests of established institutions and is
sometimes considered subversive and illegitimate (Yunus, 2007).
The scope and scale of their impacts, as well as the deficits of
legitimacy that they could face, require that social engineers take
advantage of popular support to fulfill their missions. As a result,

Marketing, and Legal; the birth
of the corporate culture was
consolidated to improve the
processes through which we
were arriving at the warehouses.
This year they are ranked No.
11 in the world for the Best
Companies for the World (Best
For The World).
In June 2017, the organization
of the Universal Exhibition of
Dubai (Expo 2020) announced
that Algramo would participate
in the event of the year 2020,
and also received a grant for the
development of new technology
prototypes to provide cheap
food and Internet connection
to the most vulnerable
communities. The Expo Live
program of the Expo 2020
in Dubai has an allocation of
100 million dollars to support
projects that offer creative
solutions to the challenges that
influence the lives of people or
contribute to the conservation
of the planet.
Currently, Algramo has a
presence in 1600 stores,
serving 220,000 consumers in
low-income neighborhoods and
avoiding 180,200 kilograms of
garbage.

6

90

Chapter 6 · Characteristics of the Social Entrepreneur

their ability to accumulate enough political capital to gather other
necessary resources and achieve legitimacy supports their ability
to act.
Case 6.3. Muhammad Yunus. From Microfinance and Microcredit to Peace and Social Development of the Poor

6

Muhammad Yunus is a social
entrepreneur and social leader
who in 2006 received the Nobel
Peace Prize for developing the
Grameen Bank and being the
developer of the concepts of
microcredit and microfinance.
These credits granted to
entrepreneurs who are too
poor to qualify for a loan in a
traditional bank.
In 1976, during his visits to the
poorest neighborhoods in the
city of Jobra near Chittagong
University, Yunus discovered
that small loans could make a
considerable difference for poor
people. Village women who
made bamboo furniture had to
accept a loan to buy bamboo
and pay almost all their profits
to the lender. Traditional banks
did not want to offer small loans
at a reasonable interest rate to
the poor because of the risk that

it meant. Yunus lent 27 dollars
of her money to 42 village
women who made a profit of
0.50 Takas (US $ 0.02) on each
loan. In December 1976, Yunus
secured a loan from the Janata
Bank to lend to Joba’s poor. The
institution continues to operate,
securing loans from other banks
for its projects.
By 1982, it had 28,000 members.
On October 1, 1983, the pilot
project went into operation
as a full bank for the poor of
Bangladesh with the name
of Grameen Bank (“People’s
Bank”). Yunus and his colleagues
faced everything from
violent right-wing radicals to
conservative clergy that women
who asked for Grameen Bank
money would be denied a
Muslim burial.
By July 2007, the Grameen
Bank had granted 6.38 billion

dollars to 7.4 million people.
To ensure the payment of the
debt, the bank uses a system
of “solidarity groups.” These
small informal groups apply
together to the loans, and their
members guarantee payments
among themselves and support
each other’s efforts to achieve
economic advancement.
The success of the Grameen
microfinance model has inspired
similar efforts in approximately
100 developing countries and
even in developed countries
such as the USA. Many
microcredit projects retained the
idea of lending to women. More
than 94% of Grameen loans are
for women who suffer disproportionately of poverty and tend
more than men to allocate their
earnings to their families.

6.6  Leadership in Social Enterprises: The Need

for Change as the Enterprise Grows Up

Social entrepreneurs must not only fulfill a leadership that allows
them to position themselves in the market or grow economically,
but also must develop skills that allow them to effectively manage the conflicting demands that arise from the commitments
to improve social welfare and achieve viability commercial. The
social entrepreneur must have the ability to understand a total situation, seeing the whole and not just a part of the system, considering all the relationships that exist between the different factors of
the situation. Social enterprises provide an environment in which
the total situation combines the passion for a social mission with a
pragmatic approach to the business purpose.
Leadership in social enterprises is the capacity to make transformations and obtain outstanding results. The leaders of these
ventures can make profound changes in their organizations or
carry out successful social reforms in the midst of adverse circumstances, and how they manage to develop motivation and effectiveness among their followers. The ability of leaders established
the work frameworks, values, and commitment within organizations. The task of the leader is to promote the organizational

91

. Fig. 6.2

Participatory
leadership
Ability to
delegate.
Social
entrepreneur
builder.

Social conglomerate.

Leadership
leadership.
Ability to
harmonize,
motivate, share
the vision and
social
commitment.
Social
entrepreneur
bricoleur or
builder.

Decentralization.

Charismatic
leadership
Entrepreneurial
and diagnostic
skills.
Entrepreneur
social bricoleur.

Institutionalization

Beginning.

6.6 · Leadership in Social Enterprises: The Need …

Political
leadership
Ability to
coordinate,
politics and
negotiate.
Social engineer
entrepreneur.

Stages followed in the process of development and consolidation of social enterprises (Source Author)

­transformations that allow the growth and consolidation of the
enterprises over time.
Now, as in traditional companies, the social entrepreneur must
make use of specific skills at certain times, defined according to
the stage of his or her venture. A social enterprise that seeks social
transformation can be visualized concerning four stages (Austin
et al., 2006): beginning, institutionalization, decentralization, and
social conglomerate (. Fig. 6.2). Due to the nature of each of them,
the entrepreneur must play a role and a different style of leadership, and therefore, also the type of social entrepreneur may or
may not favor the development of these stages.
In the start stage, the social entrepreneur starts with an analysis
of the context and the identification of a problem to take action.
The interaction with other social actors and the environment
in which they operate play an important role since the position
that an individual occupies within society can facilitate entrepreneurship. The entrepreneur takes advantage of their relationships
or contact networks to start the venture. Must have the ability to
undertake, but also diagnostic, because through them is how to
start to give life to its initiative. A charismatic leadership style contributes to obtaining the necessary resources to start social entrepreneurship. Usually, at this stage, the enterprises focus on the
local area, so that a social entrepreneur bricoleur is the one who
can favor its development.
In the institutionalization stage, the aim is to stop relying on
the leader and achieve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
organization through the development of the necessary administrative structure, without losing sight of the social purpose of the
initiative. The challenge is to secure the economic resources so that
the enterprise achieves its financial sustainability and the adhesion of collaborators, forming a work team capable of managing
the initiative. The leader presents the ability to harmonize, motivate and share the vision and social commitment that is required
to achieve the expected impact. Management leadership uses
systems and structures to give a precise orientation to its work
team, and which, in a personal way, guides and exercises control
over decision making at all levels of the organization. Continuous
improvement and organizational learning should be constituted

6

92

6

Chapter 6 · Characteristics of the Social Entrepreneur

as institutional goals, and as a tool to achieve the objectives. The
institutionalization of entrepreneurship is critical to ensure the
continuity of the initiative. In this case, a social entrepreneur bricoleur or builder can favor the consolidation of this stage.
The decentralization stage creates teams capable of implementing social initiatives and efficiently manage the units created within
the enterprise. Leadership consists of two dimensions: at a central
level, strategic and related to the mission of the organization, and
at a particular level, executive and related to the implementation
and administration of specific ventures. The founding leader frequently remains at the central level, deciding to open or close units
and, sometimes, the allocation of financial resources to develop
different activities. Its most important ability is to delegate. Decentralization then allows organizations to carry out various social
enterprises simultaneously. It is necessary to move from an individual leadership to participatory leadership, distributed decision
making to different levels of the organization, so it is handy to carefully select those who will lead the different units of the enterprise.
In this case, the social entrepreneur must be a builder, since it has
to develop structures that favor the scaling of the enterprise.
The social conglomerate consists of a set of organizations
or units that independently develop social ventures and that,
although they have their organizational structure, work under a
shared strategy. The success of the operation and the social performance of these conglomerates depends on the centralization
of certain critical aspects that give efficiency and effectiveness to
the organization. Leadership in a social conglomerate is political
and manifests itself from a centralized unit that dictates common
strategic guidelines for the enterprises and coordinates critical
functions so that it operates efficiently. In order to achieve the
reorganization of tasks, the leaders use their political and negotiation capacity to assemble the different activities of the conglomerate under a common strategy and to reconcile the tensions that
may arise between the different undertakings. The type of social
entrepreneur ideal for this stage is the engineer.
6.7  Conclusions

The social entrepreneur is a critical element in the development
and positioning of any social enterprise. It is an agent of change
that, sensitive to a particular problem, decides to take action and
creates an organization or initiative with the interest of responding to the problems it faces. This agent has different characteristics
that differentiate him from a traditional entrepreneur, highlighting
the fact that his happiness or self-realization focuses on the generation of social value and not on the generation of wealth.
The implementation of this organization requires responding to various challenges, which must be addressed by the social
entrepreneur systemically and appropriately. Perhaps the most significant challenge faced in the simultaneous generation of value
(economic and social) and making decisions that allow the bal-

6.8 · Exercise

anced growth of social entrepreneurship: achieve social impact
without compromising financial sustainability, and vice versa.
At the moment of addressing a specific problem, the social
entrepreneur is expected to have minimum characteristics to
achieve it. However, its scalability is limited by the type of entrepreneur who carries it out and by the problems that it is desired to
address. Those problems that arise exclusively at the local level will
require a bricoleur social entrepreneur, as is the case of Gericare.
A problem addressed through the transformation of the system
will need a social engineer entrepreneur, as is the case of Yunus
that has transformed the financial industry through its proposal of
microcredits and promotion of social entrepreneurs.
The growth of the social enterprise also requires an evolution in
the appropriate leadership style according to its stage. In the beginning, the entrepreneur is charismatic, allowing him to add more people to his initiative. However, when it comes to scaling up its business
and consolidating it, it requires a participatory style, where it delegates activities and favors the decentralization of its processes and
achieves autonomy among its units. Because social transformation
requires more actors involved, some social enterprises reach a stage
of social conglomeration, where the political style of the social entrepreneur is critical to achieve its consolidation and operation, as has
happened with the case of Coporación Mondragón (7 Chapter 5).
It is important to remember that the social entrepreneur is
an agent of change in the process of formation, so it is not necessary that from the beginning he has all the mentioned characteristics or skills or that he exercises some leadership or another. It
is a problem, context, and entrepreneurship that defines the role,
skills, and characteristics that the social entrepreneur should apply
or develop, always taking into account that the ultimate goal is the
transformation of society and attention to the causes presented by
the problem that want to face.
6.8  Exercise

Taking into consideration the local or regional context of the place
where you live, identify a problem that should be addressed. Identify who is currently solving this problem—at the local, national,
or international level—and how they are doing it. Do an investigation about the founder or social entrepreneur and the social enterprise that directs and answers the following questions.
5 What is the background of the social entrepreneur and what
situation or aspect led him to undertake?
5 Based on the background above, what kind of social entrepreneur is it?
5 At what stage is social entrepreneurship?
5 Using . Fig. 6.2, make a matrix where you can identify how the
social entrepreneur developed the leadership style, skills, and
type of entrepreneur in each of the stages.
5 What challenges does the social entrepreneur currently face
and what skills would he have to develop to overcome them?

93

6

94

Chapter 6 · Characteristics of the Social Entrepreneur

6.9  Additional Resources

Websites and lectures:
5 If Billionaires Are A Cause Of Climate Change, Social Entrepreneurs Are A Solution
5 7 https://www.forbes.com/sites/devinthorpe/2018/12/22/if-billionaires-are-a-cause-of-climate-change-social-entrepreneursare-a-solution/#56c84765123e

5 Famous Social Entrepreneurs Doing Good and Making Money
5 7 https://changecreator.com/8-famous-social-entrepreneurs-need-know/

6

5 Latin America Social Entrepreneurs Honoured at World Economic Forum Meeting in Mexico
5 7 https://www.weforum.org/press/2015/05/latin-america-social-entrepreneurs-honoured-at-world-economic-forum-meeting-in-mexico/

5 World-changers: meet the Social Entrepreneurs of the Year
2018
5 7 https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/09/world-changersmeet-the-social-entrepreneurs-of-the-year-2018/

Videos:
5 Social Entrepreneurs: Pioneering Social Change
5 7 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jk5LI_WcosQ

References
Alter, S. K. (2006). Social enterprise models and their mission and money relationships. In A. Nicholls (Ed.), Social entrepreneurship: New models of sustainable social change (pp. 205–232). New York: Oxford University Press.
Austin, J., Gutierrez, R., Ogliastri, E., & Reficco, E. (2006). Gestión efectiva de
emprendimientos sociales. Lecciones extraídas de empresas y organizaciones
de la sociedad civil en Iberoamérica (SEKN, Ed.). México, DF: Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo.
Barki, E., Comini, G., Cunliffe, A., Hart, S., & Rai, S. (2015). Social entrepreneurship and social business: Retrospective and prospective research.
RAE-Revista de Administração de Empresas, 55(4), 380–384. 7 https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-8349-7093-0.
Chell, E., Nicolopoulou, K., & Karataş-Özkan, M. (2010). Social entrepreneurship
and enterprise: International and innovation perspectives. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 22(6), 485–493. 7 https://doi.org/10.1080/0
8985626.2010.488396.
Dey, P., & Teasdale, S. (2013). Social enterprise and dis/identification. Admin­
istrative Theory & Praxis, 35(2), 248–270. 7 https://doi.org/10.2753/
ATP1084-1806350204.
Di Domenico, M., Haugh, H., & Tracey, P. (2010). Social bricolage: Theorizing
social value creation in social enterprises. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 34(4), 681–703.
Grassl, W. (2012). Business models of social enterprise: A design approach to
hybridity. ACRN Journal of Entrepreneurship Perspectives, 1(1), 37–60.
Light, P. C. (2005). Searching for social entrepreneurs: Who they might
be, where they might be found what they do, 1–27. 7 https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2.
Mair, J., Battilana, J., & Cardenas, J. (2012). Organizing for society: A typology of
social entrepreneuring models. Journal of Business Ethics, 111(3), 353–373.

95
References

Marshall, R. S. (2011). Conceptualizing the international for-profit social
entrepreneur. Journal of Business Ethics, 98(2), 183–198. 7 https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10551-010-0545-7.
Martin, R. L., & Osberg, S. (2007). Social entrepreneurship: The case for definition. Stanford Social Innovation Review, 5(2), 28–39.
Nicholls, A. (2013). Heroes. Journal of Social Entrepreneurship, 4(2), 109–112.
Sastre-Castillo, M. A., Peris-Ortiz, M., & Danvila-Del Valle, I. (2015). What is different about the profile of the social entrepreneur? Nonprofit Management
& Leadership, 4(Summer), 41–50. 7 https://doi.org/10.1002/nml.
Tracey, P., & Phillips, N. (2007). The distinctive challenge of educating social
entrepreneurs: A postscript and rejoinder to the special issue on entrepreneurship education. Academy of Management Learning and Education, 6(2),
264–271. 7 https://doi.org/10.5465/AMLE.2007.25223465.
Vázquez-Maguirre, M., & Portales, L. (2018). Profits and purpose: Organizational
tensions in indigenous social enterprises, 14(4), 604–618.
Waddock, S. A., & Post, J. E. (1991). Social entrepreneurs and catalytic change.
Public Administration Review, 51(5), 393. 7 https://doi.org/10.2307/976408.
Yunus, M. (2006). Social business entrepreneurs are the solution. Skoll World
Forum on Social Entrepreneurship. Oxford: Said Business School, Oxford
University.
Yunus, M. (2007). Creating a world without poverty: Social business and the
future of capitalism (K. Weber, Ed.) (1st ed.). New York: Public Affairs.
Zahra, S. A., Gedajlovic, E., Neubaum, D. O., & Shulman, J. M. (2009). A typology
of social entrepreneurs: Motives, search processes and ethical challenges.
Journal of Business Venturing, 24(5), 519–532. 7 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusvent.2008.04.007.

6

