Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Business Venturing

A typology of social entrepreneurs: Motives, search processes and ethical
challenges☆
Shaker A. Zahra a,⁎, Eric Gedajlovic b,1, Donald O. Neubaum c,2, Joel M. Shulman d,3
a

Department of Strategic Management and Organization and Gary Holmes Entrepreneurship Center, Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota, 321 19th
Avenue South (Suite # 3-428), Minneapolis MN 55455, United States
Simon Fraser University, Surrey, B.C. Canada V3T OA3
c
Oregon State University, College of Business, 400E Bexell Hall, Corvallis, OR 97331, United States
d
Arthur M. Blank Center, Babson College, Babson Park, MA 02457, United States
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Keywords:
Social entrepreneurship
Social wealth
Entrepreneurial search process
Typologies
Ethics

a b s t r a c t
Social entrepreneurship has been the subject of considerable interest in the literature. This
stems from its importance in addressing social problems and enriching communities and
societies. In this article, we deﬁne social entrepreneurship; discuss its contributions to creating
social wealth; offer a typology of entrepreneurs' search processes that lead to the discovery of
opportunities for creating social ventures; and articulate the major ethical concerns social
entrepreneurs might encounter. We conclude by outlining implications for entrepreneurs and
advancing an agenda for future research, especially the ethics of social entrepreneurship.
© 2009 Published by Elsevier Inc.

1. Executive summary
Social entrepreneurs make signiﬁcant and diverse contributions to their communities and societies, adopting business models
to offer creative solutions to complex and persistent social problems. We propose that social entrepreneurship “encompasses the
activities and processes undertaken to discover, deﬁne, and exploit opportunities in order to enhance social wealth by creating new
ventures or managing existing organizations in an innovative manner".
In this article, we highlight social wealth as a metric for measuring the contributions of social entrepreneurship within the
context of total wealth maximization. To us, “total wealth” comprises both economic and social wealth. Our proposed metric,
therefore, acknowledges that any economic and social value created may offset the economic and social costs incurred. It also takes
into account the forgone costs of other opportunities not pursued.
Building on the work of Hayak, Kirzner and Schumpeter, we also identify three types of social entrepreneurs: Social Bricoleur,
Social Constructionist, and Social Engineer. Social Bricoleurs usually focus on discovering and addressing small-scale local social
needs. Social Constructionists typically exploit opportunities and market failures by ﬁlling gaps to underserved clients in order to
introduce reforms and innovations to the broader social system. Finally, Social Engineers recognize systemic problems within
existing social structures and address them by introducing revolutionary change. As a result, these entrepreneurs often destroy
dated systems, and replace them with newer and more suitable ones. Given these differences, we propose that these three types of
☆ We acknowledge with appreciation the supportive comments of Norman Bowie (guest editor), Dan Forbes, Hans Rawhouser, Peter Rich, Harry Sapienza, Sri
Zaheer, Patricia H. Zahra, anonymous reviewers as well as participants of the University of Minnesota/Journal of Business Venturing Conference on Ethics and
Entrepreneurship, seminar participants at Texas Christian University and the special Strategic Management Society Conference in Catania, Italy.
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 612 626 6623; fax: +1 612 626 1316.
E-mail addresses: zahra004@umn.edu (S.A. Zahra), egedajlovic@business.uconn.edu (E. Gedajlovic), don.neubaum@bus.oregonstate.edu (D.O. Neubaum),
shulman@babson.edu (J.M. Shulman).
1
Tel.: +1 860 486 3638.
2
Tel.: +1 541 737 6036.
3
Tel.: +1 781 239 4446.
0883-9026/$ – see front matter © 2009 Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2008.04.007

520

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

social entrepreneurs vary in how they discover social opportunities (i.e., search processes), determine their impact on the broader
social system, and assemble the resources needed to pursue these opportunities. We also discuss ethical issues unique to each type
of social entrepreneur.
A key contribution of our article is highlighting key ethical concerns encountered when uniting economic thinking with the
desire to generate social wealth. These challenges vary based upon social entrepreneurs' motives, the resources needed to pursue
their ambitions, as well as the governance and control mechanisms employed to regulate their behaviors. Because the goals of
social ventures are deeply rooted in the values of their founders, balancing the motives to create social wealth with the need for
proﬁts and economic efﬁciency can be tricky. Applying new and untested organizational models also raises concerns about the
accountability of the actors involved. Furthermore, social entrepreneurs operate in domains with scant governance and oversight.
This enables some to cut ethical corners or place their personal agendas and economic objectives ahead of the ﬁduciary needs of
their clients. We conclude by outlining key implications for social ventures' founders and entrepreneurs. We also offer an agenda
for future research on the ethics of social entrepreneurship.
Social entrepreneurship is an important topic that has sparked ongoing discussion and debate (Austin et al., 2006). Some
scholars have begun to delineate the distinct domain of this phenomenon, examine its potential to address social problems, and
explore its implications for wealth creation (Austin et al., 2006; Bornstein, 2004; Davis, 2002; Dees et al., 2004; MacMillan, 2005).
To some, social entrepreneurship offers innovative solutions to complex and persistent social issues by applying traditional
business and market-oriented models (Spear, 2006; Dorado, 2006; Mair and Noboa, 2003; Pearce and Doh, 2005). As such, social
entrepreneurship provides an alternative to a culture of greed and selﬁshness (Hemingway, 2005; Mintzberg et al., 2002). Still,
others view social entrepreneurship as a vague and poorly understood concept (Martin and Osberg, 2007) whose practice raises
thorny ethical concerns (Fowler, 2000). These issues reﬂect the unique values that social entrepreneurs hold and the search
processes they follow in identifying, evaluating and exploiting opportunities.
In this article, we have two objectives. First, we build on the work of Hayek (1945), Kirzner (1973) and Schumpeter (1934) to
advance a typology that identiﬁes three types of social entrepreneurs. These entrepreneurs vary in how they deﬁne opportunities,
view their missions, acquire resources, and address social ills. Second, we use the proposed typology of social entrepreneurs to
explore various ethical issues encountered in practice. Entrepreneurial activities are often associated with the opportunity to cut
ethical corners (Barendsen and Gardner, 2004; Kuratko and Goldsby, 2004). Yet, balancing social wealth with the desire to make
proﬁts and maintain economic efﬁciency is no simple matter. The new and untested organizational models that social
entrepreneurs follow often raise concerns about their accountability and contributions. To fully appreciate these concerns, we ﬁrst
discuss the importance and domain of social entrepreneurship.
2. The importance and domain of social entrepreneurship
Throughout the world, socially conscious individuals have introduced and applied innovative business models to address social
problems previously overlooked by business, governmental and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). These entrepreneurs
have played a vital role in ameliorating adverse social conditions, especially in underdeveloped and emerging economies where
resource scarcity and corruption among governments and even NGOs severely limit the attention given to serious social needs
(Prahalad, 2005; Zahra et al., in press). Social entrepreneurs have also become highly visible agents of change in developed
economies, where they have applied innovative and cost-effective methods to address nagging social problems (i.e., poverty,
gender inequality, etc.) that have deﬁed traditional solutions (Cox and Healey, 1998). The movement by several countries to
“marketize” the social service sector (Salamon, 1999) has also fueled the desire to use the efﬁciency of competitive markets to
improve social performance (Goerke, 2003; Zahra et al., 2000). Several governments, including that of the US, have also
dramatically cut federal spending on social services such as education and community development (Lasprogata and Cotton,
2003), creating a need for entrepreneurial activities to raise funds and address social needs.
The global movement toward privatization and marketization has also profoundly inﬂuenced not-for-proﬁt organizations and
NGOs, pressuring them to address the gaps left in the provision of social services. Though funding for these activities from
traditional sources has declined (Wolverton, 2003), the costs of delivering these programs have increased (Leadbetter, 1997).
Consequently, more and more not-for-proﬁt organizations attend to an expanding set of complex social needs, yet rely on fewer
funds. This has prompted some not-for-proﬁts to apply entrepreneurial strategies and business models. This includes forming
collaborative relationships to ﬁnance and operate programs that pursue their social missions (Foster and Bradach, 2005; Chell,
2007; Pearce and Doh, 2005). These institutional changes have also given rise to a variety of social ventures (Dorado, 2006;
Thompson and Doherty, 2006).
Despite the growing scholarly interest in social entrepreneurship (Hemingway, 2005), there is no clear deﬁnition of its domain.
This task has been complicated by social entrepreneurship's numerous manifestations, and the breadth of the scholarly
communities studying the subject. Furthermore, the term itself combines two ambiguous words connoting different things to
different people (Mair and Marti, 2004). Disagreements persist about the domain of entrepreneurship (Shane and Venkataraman,
2000; Zahra and Dess, 2001) and adding the value-laden preﬁx “social” further exacerbates this deﬁnitional debate. Table 1 presents
20 deﬁnitions and descriptions of social entrepreneurship or social entrepreneurs found in the literature. In presenting these
deﬁnitions, we do not strive to ﬁnd a statement encompassing all aspects of these diverse deﬁnitions. Rather, we provide a deﬁnition
that integrates common points of view and facilitates the development of a heuristic to measure the creation of total wealth.
Entrepreneurs, including those who have found and lead social ventures, usually pursue multiple goals that include a diverse
set of personal objectives (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Baker et al., 2005). Commercial entrepreneurs are largely driven by

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

521

Table 1
Deﬁnitions and descriptions of social entrepreneurship and social entrepreneurs.
Source

Deﬁnition

Leadbetter (1997)

The use of entrepreneurial behavior for social ends rather than for proﬁt objectives, or alternatively, that the proﬁts generated from
market activities are used for the beneﬁt of a speciﬁc disadvantaged group.
Thake and Zadek (1997)
Social entrepreneurs are driven by a desire for social justice. They seek a direct link between their actions and an improvement in the
quality of life for the people with whom they work and those that they seek to serve. They aim to produce solutions which are
sustainable ﬁnancially, organizationally, socially and environmentally.
Dees (1998)
Play the role of change agents in the social sector, by: 1) Adopting a mission to create and sustain social value (not just private value),
2) Recognizing and relentlessly pursuing new opportunities to serve that mission, 3) Engaging in a process of continuous innovation,
adaptation, and learning, 4) Acting boldly without being limited by resources currently in hand, and 5) Exhibiting heightened
accountability to the constituencies served and for the outcomes created.
Reis (1999)
Social entrepreneurs create social value through innovation and leveraging ﬁnancial resources…for social, economic and community
(Kellogg Foundation)
development.
Fowler (2000)
Social Entrepreneurship is the creation of viable socio-economic structures, relations, institutions, organizations and practices that
yield and sustain social beneﬁts.
Brinkerhoff (2001)
Individuals constantly looking for new ways to serve their constituencies and add value to existing services
Mort et al. (2002)
A multidimensional construct involving the expression of entrepreneurially virtuous behavior to achieve the social mission…the
ability to recognize social value creating opportunities and key decision-making characteristics of innovation, proactiveness and risktaking
Drayton (2002)
A major change agent, one whose core values center on identifying, addressing and solving societal problems.
Alford et al. (2004)
Creates innovative solutions to immediate social problems and mobilizes the ideas, capacities, resources and social arrangements
required for social transformations
Harding (2004)
Entrepreneurs motivated by social objectives to instigate some form of new activity or venture.
Shaw (2004)
The work of community, voluntary and public organizations as well as private ﬁrms working for social rather than only proﬁt
objectives.
Said School (2005)
A professional, innovative and sustainable approach to systematic change that resolves social market failures and grasps
opportunities
Fuqua School (2005)
The art of simultaneously pursuing both a ﬁnancial and a social return on investment (the “double” bottom line)
Schwab Foundation (2005) Applying practical, innovative and sustainable approaches to beneﬁt society in general, with an emphasis on those who are
marginalized and poor.
NYU Stern (2005)
The process of using entrepreneurial and business skills to create innovative approaches to social problems. “These non-proﬁt and for
proﬁt ventures pursue the double bottom line of social impact and ﬁnancial self-sustainability or proﬁtability.”
MacMillan (2005)
Process whereby the creation of new business enterprise leads to social wealth enhancement so that both society and the
(Wharton Center)
entrepreneur beneﬁt.
Tan et al. (2005)
Making proﬁts by innovation in the face of risk with the involvement of a segment of society and where all or part of the beneﬁts
accrue to that same segment of society.
Mair and Marti (2006a)
…a process of creating value by combining resources in new ways…intended primarily to explore and exploit opportunities to create
social value by stimulating social change or meeting social needs.
Peredo and McLean (2006) Social entrepreneurship is exercised where some person or group….aim(s) at creating social value…shows a capacity to recognize
and take advantage of opportunities…employ innovation…accept an above average degree of risk…and are unusually resourceful …
in pursuing their social venture.
Martin and Osberg (2007) Social entrepreneurship is the: 1) identiﬁcation a stable yet unjust equilibrium which the excludes, marginalizes or causes suffering
to a group which lacks the means to transform the equilibrium; 2) identiﬁcation of an opportunity and developing a new social value
proposition to challenge the equilibrium, and 3) forging a new, stable equilibrium to alleviate the suffering of the targeted group
through imitation and creation of a stable ecosystem around the new equilibrium to ensure a better future for the group and society.

proﬁts (Knight, 1921; Schumpeter, 1934; Kirzner, 1973) and their performance is typically measured by ﬁnancial returns (Austin et
al., 2006). Social entrepreneurs often espouse both social and economic goals in pursuing a particular opportunity (e.g., Dorado,
2006; Thompson and Doherty, 2006).
It is noteworthy that the deﬁnitions we gathered from entrepreneurship centers at some leading business schools usually cite a
double bottom line, placing social and economic dimensions on an equal footing (Table 1). For example, the Wharton Center, NYU
Stern and the Fuqua School all emphasize doing well ﬁnancially by doing good. However, other deﬁnitions shown in Table 1
suggest that social entrepreneurs are strongly motivated to achieve some socially desirable objectives. These latter deﬁnitions
stress the creation of social wealth (Dees, 1998; Reis, 1999; Mort et al. 2002; Mair and Marti, 2006a; Peredo and McLean, 2006;
Martin and Osberg, 2007), total wealth (Fowler, 2000; Schwab Foundation, 2005; Tan et al., 2005), social justice (Thake and Zadek,
1997), or the resolution of certain social problems (Drayton, 2002; Alford et al., 2004; Said School, 2005). On the whole, most
existing deﬁnitions imply that social entrepreneurship relates to exploiting opportunities for social change and improvement,
rather than traditional proﬁt maximization.
Social entrepreneurship offers the quintessential example of how diverse motives (Spear, 2006) can inspire individuals to
conceive, build and operate organizations that address personally important issues. This belief builds on Cyert and March's
(1963:9) observation that “entrepreneurs, like anyone else, have a host of personal motives,” reﬂecting both economic and noneconomic goals. Following this logic, organizations pursuing proﬁts as their sole objective often fall outside the domain of
social entrepreneurship. Similarly, for-proﬁt ﬁrms engaged in philanthropic endeavors or socially responsible activities would
generally lie outside the boundaries of social entrepreneurship. Likewise, not-for-proﬁt organizations, social service organizations
or NGOs ignoring the economic implications of their operations would generally also lie outside the boundaries of social
entrepreneurship.

522

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

Even though the deﬁnitions listed in Table 1 reinforce the essential social dimensions and mixed motives of social
entrepreneurs, they are silent on how to evaluate such opportunities and ventures. Obviously, metrics related to proﬁtability or
returns on investment are relatively straightforward standards by which opportunities and organizational performance are
evaluated. However, similar standards are missing in the case of social entrepreneurship. The absence of such standards, along with
the vagueness of the “social” preﬁx, creates a situation where just about any venture could be considered “social
entrepreneurship.” Further, without an appropriate metric, attempts to hold practitioners of social entrepreneurship accountable
for their performance will be ineffective.
In reﬂecting on the 20 deﬁnitions presented in Table 1, we believe any deﬁnition, measurement or evaluation of social
entrepreneurship should reﬂect both social and economic considerations. We, therefore, propose the broader term “total wealth”
as a standard to evaluate those opportunities and organizational processes related to social entrepreneurship. To us, “total wealth,”
has tangible (e.g., products, clients served, or funds generated) and intangible outcomes such as wealth, happiness and general
well-being. Thus, Total Wealth (TW) = Economic Wealth (EW) + Social Wealth (SW). Further, TW = EW + SW, where
EW = Economic Value (EV) − Economic Costs (EC) − Opportunity Costs (OC); SW Social Wealth = Social Value (SV) − Social
Costs (SC). As a result, TW = EV + SV − (EC + OC + SC).
Our proposed “total wealth” standard accounts for both the social and economic dimensions of social entrepreneurship across
varying levels of participation. It also provides for the social value created by some for-proﬁt entities (Table 1), making it clear how
both economic and social wealth can be created by entrepreneurial entities in the pursuit of total wealth maximization. Further,
the “total wealth” standard indicates how entrepreneurs can potentially shift resources in a manner that enhances wealth in one
category at the expense of another (e.g., pursue economic wealth while polluting the environment). It also underscores how the
social value created by entrepreneurs may be offset by economic costs (i.e., the market value of goods and services spent to create
social value) as well as the social costs (e.g., social discord) incurred in generating social value. Given the scarcity of human and
ﬁnancial resources, any evaluation of social wealth creation should also account for opportunity costs — the social and economic
value forgone if these resources had been applied to other productive endeavors.
In sum, the “total wealth” standard illustrates how entrepreneurial entities can have various gradations or combinations of both
economic and social wealth generation. At one extreme, an entrepreneurial entity may focus purely on economic wealth creation
without regard to social wealth creation. At the other extreme, however, a social entrepreneur may dedicate his (her) resources
exclusively to social wealth generation, ignoring economic wealth creation. This is consistent with the deﬁnitions displayed in
Table 1 that show an array of combinations of social entrepreneurial activities with varying emphases on economic wealth or social
wealth development.
The “total wealth” standard, with its demarcation of economic and social wealth, can be useful for scholars, donors and
practitioners as they evaluate both economic and social opportunities and ventures. It can also provide a benchmark for evaluating
the performance of economic and social ventures based on desired performance goals or performance relative to other
organizations. This standard can also guide social entrepreneurs as they identify the value of the opportunities they decide to
pursue. Donors can also apply this standard to monitor and hold social entrepreneurs accountable or focus their ventures on
achieving better outcomes.
Still, the social wealth standard is imprecise and difﬁcult to measure because many of the products and services that social
entrepreneurs provide are non-quantiﬁable. For instance, what is the social value of clean water in remote villages, the adoption of
orphans from wartorn nations or the empowerment of women entrepreneurs in oppressive societies? Further complicating the
task of determining social wealth is the subjective nature of social value itself, which varies greatly from one context to another
(Baker et al., 2005). Still, the social wealth standard offers a promising heuristic for evaluating social opportunities and ventures. It
also delineates the distinctiveness and contribution of social entrepreneurship.
The literature also underscores the importance of the capacity of those involved in discovering and pursuing social
opportunities for venture success (Dees, 1998; Brinkerhoff, 2001; Mort et al. 2002; Schwab Foundation, 2005; NYU Stern, 2005;
Mair and Marti, 2006a; Peredo and McLean, 2006). The successful pursuit of social entrepreneurs' mission requires that they
effectively perform a variety of activities — some innovative and some decidedly mundane (e.g., bookkeeping). However, many of
the descriptions presented in Table 1 highlight only those activities directly related to the innovative delivery of products and
services (Reis, 1999; Mort et al. 2002; Alford et al., 2004; Harding, 2004; Mair and Marti, 2006a,b; Peredo and McLean, 2006).
Consequently, those individuals and organizations not actively engaged in innovative means of delivering products and services
fall outside the ﬁeld of social entrepreneurship.
To summarize, deﬁning social entrepreneurship requires appreciating the motivations of individuals and groups who take the
risks associated with conceiving, building, launching and sustaining new organizations and business models. This means certain
individuals with particular values, capabilities and skills will be attracted to social entrepreneurship, search for opportunities, and
innovative organizational responses to create social wealth. By integrating these observations, we suggest the following deﬁnition:
Social entrepreneurship encompasses the activities and processes undertaken to discover, deﬁne, and exploit opportunities in order to
enhance social wealth by creating new ventures or managing existing organizations in an innovative manner.
3. Typology of social entrepreneurship
Our proposed deﬁnition of social entrepreneurship underscores the diverse motives, the types of ventures created, and
organizational activities (or strategies) designed to enhance social wealth. After all, entrepreneurial discovery is as much about
problem ﬁnding as problem solving. This means different types of social entrepreneurs exist, addressing speciﬁc social problems in

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

523

their own ways and within their own realms. Some might be the grand visionaries who identify big or even worldwide social
causes and mobilize forces to tackle these concerns (Zahra et al., in press). In fact, one of the greatest skills of many social
entrepreneurs is their ability to inspire, marshal and mobilize the efforts of commercial and non-commercial partners, donors,
volunteers and employees in the pursuit of social wealth. Building collaborative relationships to implement social initiatives is
often crucial for success (Pearce and Doh, 2005). Other social entrepreneurs might be more adept at creating organizations that
tackle these issues. Still, some entrepreneurs focus more on local issues. Given this variability, we present a typology that reﬂects
the diversity of social entrepreneurs. The three types we deﬁne, however, do not capture all potentially observable varieties of
social entrepreneurship. Still, our typology sets the stage for recognizing the potential antecedents, processes and consequences of
different types of social entrepreneurship.
As a point of departure in developing our typology, we build alternative conceptualizations of entrepreneurship derived from
Hayek (1945), Kirzner (1973) and Schumpeter (1942). The typology allows us to identify similarities and differences among the
broad range of individuals and organizations engaged in social entrepreneurship. As a result, we provide illustrative examples of
these three types of social entrepreneurs: Social Bricoleurs, Social Constructionists and Social Engineers. Though these
entrepreneurs share a passion for pursuing social issues, major differences exist among them in how they discover social needs
(i.e., search processes), pursue social opportunities, and impact the broader social system. We also discuss the types of resources
these entrepreneurs garner and deploy in pursuing particular opportunities. Table 2 summarizes the key differences among the
three social entrepreneurial types.
3.1. The Social Bricoleur
Hayek's (1945) work highlights the critical role private, local knowledge or contextual information play in the entrepreneurial
process. Rather than describing markets as rational, broadly understood and predictable arenas, Hayek emphasizes the ‘kaleidic’

Table 2
A typology of social entrepreneurship.
Type

Social Bricoleur

Social Constructionists

Social Engineer

Theoretical
inspiration

Hayek

Kirzner

Schumpeter

What they do?

Perceive and act upon opportunities to address Build and operate alternative structures to
provide goods and services addressing social
a local social needs they are motivated and
needs that governments, agencies, and
have the expertise and resources to address.
businesses cannot.

Creation of newer, more effective social
systems designed to replace existing ones
when they are ill-suited to address signiﬁcant
social needs.

Scale, scope
and timing

Small scale, local in scope—often episodic in
nature.

Why they are
necessary?

Small to large scale, local to international in
scope, designed to be institutionalized to
address an ongoing social need.
Knowledge about social needs and the abilities Laws, regulation, political acceptability,
inefﬁciencies and/or lack of will prevent
to address them are widely scattered. Many
existing governmental and business
social needs are non-discernable or easily
organizations from addressing many
misunderstood from afar, requiring local
important social needs effectively.
agents to detect and address them.

Very large scale that is national to international
in scope and which seeks to build lasting
structures that will challenge existing order.
Some social needs are not amenable to
amelioration within existing social structures.
Entrenched incumbents can thwart actions to
address social needs that undermine their own
interests and source of power.

Social
Signiﬁcance

Collectively, their actions help maintain social
harmony in the face of social problems

They seek to rip apart existing social structures
and replace them with new ones. They
represent an important force for social change
in the face of entrenched incumbents.
Fractures existing social equilibrium and seeks
to replace it with a more socially efﬁcient one

They mend the social fabric where it is torn,
address acute social needs within existing
broader social structures, and help maintain
social harmony.
Effect on Social Atomistic actions by local social entrepreneurs Addressing gaps in the provision of socially
signiﬁcant goods and service creates new
Equilibrium
move us closer to a theoretical “social
“social equilibriums.”
equilibrium.”
They address needs left un- addressed and
Source of
Being on the spot with the skills to address
have limited/no competition. They may even
Discretion
local problems not on others' ”radars.” Local
be welcomed and be seen as a “release valve”
scope means they have limited resource
requirements and are fairly autonomous. Small preventing negative publicity/social
scale and local scope allows for quick response problems that may adversely affect existing
governmental and business organizations.
times.
Limits to
Discretion

Not much aside from local laws and
regulations. However, the limited resources
and expertise they possess limit their ability to
address other needs or expand geographically.

Need to acquire ﬁnancial and human
resources necessary to fulﬁll mission and
institutionalize as a going concern. Funder
demands oversight. Professional volunteers
and employees are needed to operate
organization.

Popular support to the extent that existing
social structures and incumbents are incapable
of addressing mportant social needs.

Seen as fundamentally illegitimate by
established parties that see them as a threat,
which brings scrutiny and attempts to
undermine the ability of the social engineers to
bring about change. The perceived illegitimacy
will inhibit the ability to raise ﬁnancial and
human resources from traditional sources. As a
consequence, they may become captive of the
parties that supply it with needed resources.

524

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

nature of the landscape, inhabited by individuals with minds unobservable and inaccessible to external actors. Hayek also views
efforts to recognize widespread opportunities as an impossible task because most of the knowledge entrepreneurs possess does
not exist outside their local context.
Following this premise, Hayek proposes that entrepreneurial opportunities can only be discovered and acted upon at a very
local level. The implication is that distant actors generally lack the relevant facts and knowledge essential to identify, frame and
evaluate a potential opportunity. This knowledge is usually tacit in nature, severely limiting outsiders' recognition of opportunities.
This tacit feature leads some individuals to make informed and intuitive judgments based on data not easily codiﬁed or transferred
between individuals or across organizations (Nelson and Winter, 1982; Conner and Prahalad, 1996).
Complementary to Hayek's position of entrepreneurship as a result of idiosyncratic, local or tacit knowledge is Levi-Strauss'
(1966) concept of bricolage. Weick (1993) deﬁnes bricolage as the use of “whatever resources and repertoires one has to perform
whatever tasks one faces” (p. 353). Baker and Nelson (2005) also consider bricolage characteristically entrepreneurial because it
involves combining existing resources to solve problems and leverage new opportunities. Consistent with Hayek's premise of
asymmetric knowledge, successful bricolage requires intimate knowledge of both local environmental conditions and locally
available resources. We call entrepreneurs who act on locally discovered opportunities with locally available resources Social
Bricoleurs.
Social Bricoleurs perform important functions. Without them, many indiscernible or unrecognizable social needs would remain
unaddressed. Even though the solutions they craft are sometimes small in scale and limited in scope, they help assuage serious
local social problems. As a result, Social Bricoleurs move us closer to what Parsons (1971) described as an ideal “social equilibrium”
where social peace and order exist. These entrepreneurs derive their power to act from being in the right place at the right time, as
well as possessing the skills to address needs not on the radar screens of larger and less proximate parties. Like the other social
entrepreneurs described in this article, Social Bricoleurs are motivated to address social needs. Yet, because of their localized and
oftentimes tacit knowledge, Social Bricoleurs are uniquely positioned to discover local social needs where they can leverage their
motivation, expertise and personal resources to create and enhance social wealth. Though not as heralded as other entrepreneurs,
Social Bricoleurs perform important social functions around the globe.
Paradoxically, Social Bricoleurs are often more difﬁcult for researchers to locate because their actions are usually based on local
knowledge. Consequently, they resist broad recognition or even comprehension by governments and the media. Further, given that
they are less concerned with broad applications, organizations that support social entrepreneurs emphasizing scalability may fail
to appreciate the contributions of Social Bricoleurs.
Oswaldo Tello, a social entrepreneur in Chiclayo, a city in northern Peru, is an example of the Social Bricoleur entrepreneur
(Rawhouser, 2007). In 2006, he founded a non-proﬁt organization, the Center for Innovation and Business Development (CIDE),
and a proﬁt-focused ﬁrm, North Peru Investment Company. Oswaldo wanted to provide a focused solution to poverty by helping
the poor with the desire to succeed at business. The two organizations work to identify a few businesses that have the capacity to
grow, while giving interested investors and business managers the opportunity to share in the risk and reward of the ventures in a
“micro venture capital-type” adaptation for the poor.
Oswaldo had been a bank ofﬁcer before joining a small microcredit institution that functioned with a sister organization in the
US that organized volunteer expeditions that combine tourism, service, and support for micro-entrepreneurs associated with the
program. Unlike many other parts of the world where a lone microﬁnance institution is the only lending alternative to local loan
sharks, multiple microﬁnance institutions in northern Peru compete to lend to the poor. In this environment, Oswaldo's
organization has focused on helping each borrower form a successful business and raise himself/herself from poverty, rather than
just providing easier access to loans for the poor.
Over time, Oswaldo had become dissatisﬁed with the progress made by the microcredit institution, despite intense applicant
screening, vetting of participants through shared religious afﬁliation and personal references, extensive business training, and
signiﬁcant managerial support. Oswaldo noticed two problems with the local application of the microcredit model. First, some
micro-entrepreneurs had business ideas that had much greater success and potential than most of those who continued to
struggle. Second, the organizations' intensive training and support failed to properly align the goals of the borrowers and the loan
ofﬁcers. Inﬂuenced by writings on new ideas of microfranchising and suggestions of the possibility that venture capital principles
could be applied to microbusiness contexts, Oswlado created an organization that could easily reach and train the needy.
Oswaldo has devoted himself to exploiting opportunities at a very local level, helping people in Northern Peru. The knowledge
needed to accomplish this objective is also intensely local. Northern Peru is quite isolated from Lima, the only location in the
country where venture capital ﬁrms exist. Living in the region all his life, his experience has helped him to know and appreciate the
business opportunities, which differ even from the more progressive capital, Lima. His local experience and connections have made
the new venture possible. The success that Oswaldo has experienced also reﬂects his own resources and motivations. Having
formerly served as a lay church leader in charge of much of the region, Oswaldo has extensive contacts across several groups and
even industries. He has also worked to piece these resources together to beneﬁt the poor. For example, the ﬁrst business
opportunity for the organization came as he was performing a consulting project for a service company in Lima that is owned by a
family from Chiclayo. Leveraging his contacts in Chiclayo, Oswaldo was able to assess the problems with their courier service and
could see an opportunity to franchise that service in a way that might help several families build a business. Oswaldo's prior
experience in banking also provided valuable knowledge and connections in Lima. His experience with microﬁnancing in Northern
Peru also increased his awareness of the unique proﬁtable opportunities that could be captured. Finally, though Oswaldo had
signiﬁcant resources that are applicable to the opportunity, his resource limitations were typical of Social Bricoleurs. For example,
given his lack of ﬁrst-hand venture capital experience, he has pieced together a consulting team from Wharton undergraduates

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

525

and philanthropists in the US with venture capital experience. His experience in business and banking in Lima, and knowledge of
members of his church in northern Peru proved to be major assets in creating a new social venture (Rawhouser, 2007).
As the preceding example would indicate, Social Bricoleurs are especially clever in assembling and deploying resources in
pursuit of their chosen causes. For example, within days after visiting the coastal areas destroyed by Hurricane Katrina, Paige
Ellison-Smith launched Project K.I.D. — Responding to Kids in Devastation. Her career as a child care trainer for the US Armed
Services, mixed with her personal experience seeing unattended children playing in dangerous ﬂoods and debris, prompted Paige
to create Project K.I.D. to provide specialized day-care to children in several Gulf communities. Within four months, she cobbled
together 220 volunteers (many of them were displaced teens also needing safety and shelter), an innovative feature that kept costs
low, creating 12 “PlayCare” sites, serving over 5600 children. Similarly, the Benedictine Sisters of Erie found an abandoned garage
to rent in downtown Erie and asked local experts to lead visual, performing and literary arts programs to at-risk inner-city children.
Other Social Bricoleurs educate local farmers about new planting, irrigation or harvesting techniques. Programs such as these
are made possible by the distinct local and tacit knowledge of enterprising people crafting small-scale and simple collaborative
solutions to address the social needs that exist in their local communities. In those situations where important relevant knowledge
is both local and tacit, Social Bricoleurs can usually address social needs more effectively than larger and more complex
organizations. What differentiates Social Bricoleurs from other social service providers is the unique manner in which they identify
local opportunities, marshal necessary resources, and deliver services to the disadvantaged.
In organizing their ventures, Social Bricoleurs typically require neither external nor specialized resources. They often rely on
whatever resources that are readily harnessed (Weick, 1993). This characteristic differs markedly from other types of social
entrepreneurs, who typically depend on numerous external suppliers to achieve their objectives. Independence from others also
enables Social Bricoleurs to operate freely from resource suppliers who sometimes attempt to constrain their efforts or impose
their own agendas (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978). Given their improvised strategies and absence of strong ties to resource suppliers,
Social Bricoleurs can be effective at self-correction (Weick, 1993), responding quickly to changing circumstances. However,
reliance on readily available resources and improvisation rather than formal planning sometimes prevents Social Bricoleurs from
addressing larger needs and scaling up their operations or expanding geographically. Thus, just as the uniqueness of their own local
knowledge and capacity to improvise provide the fuel for their discoveries, the ability of Social Bricoleurs to expand is often limited
by their own ignorance of social needs and opportunities outside the realm of their knowledge.

3.2. The Social Constructionist
According to Kirzner (1973), opportunities do not necessarily arise from an entrepreneur's speciﬁc local knowledge, but rather
from their alertness to opportunities which they leverage by developing products, goods and services. Entrepreneurs, therefore,
construct and introduce “systemic changes in expectations concerning ends and means” (Kirzner, 1973: 71). By introducing
innovations, Kirznerian entrepreneurs successfully and proﬁtably exploit opportunities by addressing those customer needs not
yet realized by current providers. Though commercial entrepreneurs seek proﬁts by quickly identifying and exploiting market
opportunities, the needs that Social Constructionists identify and pursue typically center on creating social wealth. Filling such
holes in the fabric of social systems is a vital entrepreneurial function (Fowler, 2000; Teegen et al., 2004).
We call social entrepreneurs who perform these functions Social Constructionists because they build, launch and operate
ventures which tackle those social needs that are inadequately addressed by existing institutions, businesses, NGOs and
government agencies.
The need for these organizations arises because for-proﬁt businesses often do not have the incentive or the basis to address
social problems (Thompson et al., 2000). Thus, though the term “social constructionist” frequently invokes other meanings, we use
it to denote the type of social entrepreneur we have just described.
Kirzner (1973) emphasizes how entrepreneurs have to be alert to opportunities and be bold and innovative in their actions
(Carney, in press). They often act as if they can accurately forecast future events and bring about a future desired state (Wood,
2005). Successful Social Constructionists often have these same characteristics (Dees, 1998; Prabhu, 1999; Johnson, 2002). They
also develop organizations to match the scale and scope of the social needs they seek to address. In some cases, the effective
organizational response can be quite small, but in many others, the response could be regional, national or even global in scope
(Brinkerhoff and Brinkerhoff, 2004).
In contrast to Social Bricoleurs who improvise solutions to small-scaled local social problems, Social Constructionists seek to
remedy broader social problems by planning and developing formalized or systemized scalable solutions to meet growing needs or
could be transferred to new and varied social contexts (Grant, 1996). These entrepreneurs' advantages do not stem from local
knowledge; they result from their unique capacity to spot and pursue those opportunities that generate social wealth by creating
and reconﬁguring the processes enacted to deliver goods and services.
Jacqueline Novogratz offers an example of the Social Constructionist entrepreneur. In 2001, Novogratz founded Acumen Fund,
“a non-proﬁt venture fund that uses entrepreneurial approaches to solve the problems of global poverty (Acumen, 2007).” The USbased fund targets its philanthropic “investments” to entrepreneurs and organizations that are “focused on delivering critical,
affordable goods and services — such as water, healthcare, and housing” to help improve the lives of the poor. Acumen's “few big
bets” receive support mostly in the form of loans and equity investments that are supplemented by providing management
assistance and connections to broader resource networks. The expectation is that these entrepreneurial ﬁrms in the developing
world have large-scale potential.

526

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

Novogratz insists that Acumen work with entrepreneurs who have systemized and scalable solutions that work on broader
social problems that ultimately inﬂuence poverty directly. She states: “To do it right (help the poor), we have to build business
models that matter, that are scalable, and that work with Africans, Indians, people all over the developing world who ﬁt in this
category (Novogratz, 2005)”. In founding Acumen Fund, Novogratz showed an alertness to opportunities to exploit market failures.
Having worked in international banking and established a microﬁnance institution in Rwanda, she understood that some of the
paradoxes of developing countries could be solved by learning business “acumen” from the industrialized world. For example,
Novogratz noticed that the poor pay 30 to 40 times as their middle-class counterparts for water, housing and health costs. She also
bet that using venture capital-like decision-making and investing patterns would reduce these costs.
In many ways, Novogratz's approach to addressing poverty is that of an arbitrageur of knowledge. She brings appropriate
knowledge, skills and resources from two different locations together to solve a widespread but speciﬁc problem. Her organization
appreciates and embraces the knowledge of local entrepreneurs to operate within existing local institutions. For example, to
improve access to malaria drugs and at the same time more effectively incorporate small Kenyan farmers into the market economy,
Acumen Fund has helped to reach an agreement with a multinational drug company to buy the artemisia (used to create antimalaria drugs) grown by 7500 local farmers. Rather than ﬁghting against the drug company, Acumen has worked with them.
Instead of building a large ﬁrm, Acumen has opted to work with the existing small-scale farmers.
While Social Constructionists may face limited competition in the delivery of their programs, competition for required
resources is often intense (Wolverton, 2003). The scope of the social needs to be addressed usually requires developing fairly large
and complex organizations with considerable ﬁnancing and stafﬁng needs. Governments, NGOs and charitable foundations are the
traditional sources of funding for these entrepreneurs (Teegen et al., 2004). In today's dynamic and challenging environment,
collaborative social initiatives that leverage the resources and capabilities of for-proﬁt and not-for-proﬁt organizations can
generate mutually beneﬁcial outcomes (Pearce and Doh, 2005).
Acquiring resources through collaborative ventures often helps Social Constructionists build, maintain and grow their
organizations. However, acquiring resources from such diverse sources may also constrain or even alter their missions. Oversight
and the reporting procedures of donor organizations can also result in outsiders having a signiﬁcant voice in how their funding is
used (Brown and Moore, 2001). Still, Social Constructionists often have to develop and hone a capability to raise funds, possibly
diverting their attention away from their primary mission. The need to staff the organization can also inﬂuence the fate of this
mission as the professional employees and volunteers begin to exert control over its operations, strategies and activities (Glaeser,
2002).
The need to acquire substantial resources also presents Social Constructionists with a paradox in managing and sustaining their
organizations. These ﬁnancial and human resources are essential to accomplishing their mission, but acquiring these resources can
be challenging (Dichter, 1999). Social Constructionists need to attract the necessary capital to fulﬁll their missions, but must do so
without signiﬁcantly altering or diluting them. They also need to effectively manage the web of complex and evolving relationships
between their organizations, donors, professional employees, and volunteers as they pursue their social missions.
3.3. The Social Engineer
Sometimes compelling social needs are not amenable to solutions within existing institutions. These institutions might be
inadequate, or entrenched governments and business elites might thwart actions intended to bring about reforms (Carney and
Gedajlovic, 2002). We call entrepreneurs who tackle these complex problems Social Engineers. These entrepreneurs differ
signiﬁcantly from the other two social entrepreneurs we have just described because they identify systemic problems within the
social systems and structures and address them by bringing about revolutionary change.
Social Engineers often introduce dramatic changes in the social sphere, resembling what Schumpeter's (1942) entrepreneurs
perform in the world of business enterprise. They act as prime movers of innovation and change, engendering “gales of creative
destruction” to destroy dated systems, structures and processes to be replaced by newer and more suitable ones. By fracturing
existing and often dominant institutions and replacing them with more socially efﬁcient ones, Social Engineers can have a
profound inﬂuence on society. Consequently, they can be a powerful force for social change. This is especially true where
entrenched incumbents and prevailing practices have become formidable barriers to reform. Given the “systemic” nature of the
problems they target, Social Engineers often attack national, transnational or global social issues. The revolutionary and ideological
nature of the reforms they introduce are usually a threat to the interests of established institutions, and are sometimes seen as
subversive and illegitimate. The large scope and scale of their ambitions, as well as the deﬁcits of legitimacy they might face,
requires Social Engineers to harness popular support to fulﬁll their missions. As a result, their capacity to act rests on their ability to
amass sufﬁcient political capital to assemble other necessary resources and achieve legitimacy.
Muhammad Yunus, who founded Grameen Bank, is one of the best known examples of a far-reaching Social Engineer. Because
of his efforts with the Grameen Bank (Bornstein, 1996), Yunus received the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize. After returning from graduate
studies in the US to be a university professor in Bangladesh, Yunus was impelled by the rampant poverty to take action. He began
speaking with the Bangladeshi poor, soon realizing that they were trapped in a vicious cycle of debt to moneylenders. Yunus went
to his friends at banks, but none wanted to lend money to the poor. As a result, Yunus decided in 1976 to loan $27 to 42 women
from the village of Jobra, India (Yunus, 1998).
This could have been another story of a Social Bricoleur focused on a local problem, but Yunus' focus evolved to changing deeply
entrenched institutions, not from within the existing system, but from outside. Yunus followed a strategy that contradicted
prevailing practice by targeting poor women and offering small loans. Internal processes of the new bank emphasized speedy

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

527

decision-making, simpliﬁed paperwork and reliance on trust. Further, instead of working with the government to provide access to
ﬁnance, or working with the U.N. or World Bank, Yunus kept Grameen Bank independent and his workers as different as possible
from government ofﬁcials. Although he had friends in government and ﬁnancial institutions, remaining independent made success
more difﬁcult. Even Bangladeshi villagers who beneﬁted from the new bank spread rumors against Yunus and his bank. To retain
ﬂexibility, Yunus persisted in keeping his bank independent. In fact, since 1995, he has not had to rely on donors. (Yunus, 1998).
Yunus also saw the potential to change long-held beliefs about gender power imbalances. He did this by loaning to women.
Before Grameen, women were the recipients of less than 1% of loans from banks to Bangladeshis (Yunus, 1998). Grameen changed
this practice by loaning almost exclusively to women (Pitt and Khandker, 1998), a decision that quickly began to alter prevailing
cognitive institutions and assumptions. Grameen Bank further changed the institution of lending by replacing legal instruments
with trust. However, Yunus did not stop there. Over time, Yunus began to work directly on changing other cognitive and normative
institutions of Bangladeshi culture. He sought to increase the feeling of interdependence within villages by requiring women
borrowers to form groups of ﬁve before they could receive a loan (Bernasek and Stanﬁeld, 1997). While loans are given out for
individual projects, the group is jointly responsible for repayment of each loan (Wahid, 1994), creating a shared sense of obligation
and increasing the likelihood the loan is repaid.
Grameen's “Sixteen Decisions” are one of the best illustrations of the institution — changing nature of organizations formed by
Social Engineers (Grameen, 2007). At weekly loan repayment meetings, borrowers repeat the 16 decisions, a list of commitments
that extend deep into the borrowers' way of living. For example, each woman repeats weekly, “We will keep our families small” and
“If we come to know of any breach of discipline in any centre, we shall all go there and help restore discipline.” Illustrating his
intent to change normative institutions, Yunus stated, “It is very difﬁcult to change peoples' minds, the way they have grown, the
way they have seen… It is a social tradition that you are opposing, and its not easy to turn the tide around.” (Ferraro, 2000).
The Grameen Bank model has been replicated throughout the world by lending US $5.1 billion to about 5.3 million people in the
developing world (Gangemi, 2005; Yunus, 2003). This engineered solution continues to ﬁx a deep systemic problem. New and
drastically different ﬁnancial institutions, in turn, challenge and change the way people think about gender, trust, legal documents,
and even social practices. Other have followed in Grameen Bank's footsteps by offering micro-credit to disadvantaged nascent
entrepreneurs around the globe (Gangemi, 2005). Schreiner (2003) observes that Gramaeen Clones have appeared and thrived in
North America (Taub, 1998), Europe (Rogaly, 1996), Latin America (Thomas, 1995), Africa (Wall Street Journal, 1998) and Asia
(Hulme, 1990).
Other types of Social Engineers exist as well. For example, Waddock and Post (1995: 951) refer to catalytic alliances as
organizations operating “at the leading edge of social reform, using the media as a strategic resource to place an issue on the public
agenda and change public attitudes.” These alliances (e.g., Hands Across America and The Partnership for a Drug-Free America)
usually tackle difﬁcult and complex social problems and reshape public attitudes about these problems. They also help generate
dramatically different patterns of resource allocations and service delivery methods — without actually delivering these services.
These catalytic alliances are often founded by entrepreneurially driven, socially-minded individuals. For example, Hands Across
America founder Ken Kraven was also instrumental in bringing the plight of starving Africans to the attention of the Western world.
Through his efforts, musicians such as Bruce Springsteen and Michael Jackson raised society's consciousness about the severity of
the hunger problem through the release of “We are the World.” Kraven organized the LiveAid and BandAid concerts, and
spearheaded the creation of USA for Africa. These were all designed to publicize the hunger problem. Similarly, The Partnership for
a Drug Free America was the brainchild of marketer Phillip Joanous, who convinced over 200 members of the American Association
of Advertising Agencies to develop and fund an anti- drug marketing campaign. The mission of these and other catalytic alliances is
not necessarily to ﬁx social problems, but to inspire others to spearhead social change.
4. Ethics of social entrepreneurship
Despite the widely acknowledged importance of social entrepreneurship, concerns persist over the ethics of its practice. Some
believe social entrepreneurship represents a harmful marriage between opposing values. The increased emphasis on efﬁcient and
proﬁtable market models dramatically clashes with many of the founding ideals of the public sector and NGOs dedicated to
fostering the public good (e.g., Eikenberry and Kluver, 2004). Critics also charge the application of organizational models that
stress competitive practices is incongruent with, and even dangerous to, the values of the traditional social models. These values
emphasize community participation, transparency, due process and stewardship (Alexander and Weiner, 1998).
Sustaining social ventures often requires a strong entrepreneurial orientation that is grounded in the use of business models.
For example, the Aravind Eye Clinic in India charges some indigent patients the equivalent of US$4 for a US$1 cataract lens to help
defray the cost of serving even poorer patients who get the implants for free (Prahaald, 2004). Nirmalan et al. (2004) found that
among India's rural poor, a large percentage need eye care services but do not seek treatments from existing institutions which are
inefﬁcient and slow. In contrast, Aravind offers quick, easy-to-access and reasonably priced, quality services that address some
unmet social needs. The business model used helps to defray the poor's cost. Still, a focus on business models can also tilt social
entrepreneurs' focus away from addressing their chosen causes toward making a proﬁt, shifting services away from the truly
indigent to only those who can afford to pay. This may also lead to the denial of services to constituents who are costly to serve. A
strong emphasis on entrepreneurial orientation could also cause the reduction, or even the abandonment, of the programs whose
outcomes are uncertain, progress is slow, or success rates are difﬁcult to measure (Eikenberry and Kluver, 2004). Thus, while an
entrepreneurial orientation can produce desirable change, its effects could also leave clients with compelling needs unserved,
marginalized, or force some to pay for services that others may get at a lower rate.

528

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

While social entrepreneurs are driven by an ethical obligation and desire to improve their communities and societies, egoism
can drive them to follow unethical practices. Egoism is especially relevant because the identity and passions of social entrepreneurs
usually compel them to create and lead social ventures. Longnecker et al. (1988: 64) observe that, “Entrepreneurial ethics may have
their roots in the individualism associated with entrepreneurial behavior,” and some have observed social entrepreneurs have the
same core temperament as their economically motivated peers (Davis, 2002). This egoistic streak, therefore, may lead some social
entrepreneurs to believe that any actions taken to fulﬁll their ambitions are ethically justiﬁed (Longnecker et al., 1988).
Each of the three social entrepreneur types we have proﬁled in this article faces unique ethical challenges. These depend on:
their motives, the resources required to pursue their ambitions, and the governance and control mechanisms in place to regulate
their behaviors. Below, we highlight these contrasts and discuss the ethical challenges that these different social entrepreneurs
might encounter.
4.1. Social Bricoleur
These entrepreneurs' motives are generally noble; they identify a local concern and bring innovative measures to bear on a
recognizable social problem. Rarely driven by an absolutely “utilitarian” value system, they usually aspire to bring social wealth to
their communities and resolve vexing local social issues. Consequently, the reach of their ego and ambitions are decidedly limited,
as are the potential ill effects that might arise in their pursuit of social wealth. Their small-scale operations and limited resource
needs reduce the pressure to revert to unethical practices to obtain the resources necessary to sustain their operations. Governance
and oversight of these ventures, as well as the continued legitimacy to serve, rests in the hands of the local communities.
One of the most serious ethical concerns about Social Bricoleurs is the efﬁciency of the allocation process they use in creating a
public good. Speciﬁcally, how is the social wealth generated best allocated? Who gets access to this wealth and how? Though price
is an important governance mechanism in a free market system, the value of a social good or service is harder to calculate. Thus, the
question persists: What can substitute for the price system when the common good is the key objective? Given these ambiguities,
it is hard to determine if, when, and how Social Bricoluers enhance social wealth. Other concerns also arise about who subsidizes
these entrepreneurs' under-pricing strategies. Also, what are the implications of sub- optimal pricing on the quality, availability
and delivery of services rendered? When social entrepreneurs branch out into for-proﬁt activities, other ethical issues related to
ﬁnancial reporting and cost accounting come into question. This problem is compounded by disagreements on how to best
measure the effectiveness of social ventures (Forbes, 1998; Kaplan, 2001). Finally, because of their small scale, Social Bricoleurs are
typically immune to contests of the market for corporate control that can curb their potential opportunism. Given that formal
controls may be impotent or even non-existent, agency problems might pervade those ventures led by Social Bricoleurs. Excessive
compensation, concentration of power, and pursuit of personal agenda at the expense of organizational goals are examples of such
dysfunctional agency problems.
4.2. Social Constructionists
The motives and ambitions of Social Constructionists are complex and multi-faceted. Their desire to generate social wealth is
matched with a hope to bring new equilibrium to broad social systems where serious imbalances exist. These entrepreneurs not
only want to serve their client group, but also seek to introduce social change and reform (Prabhu, 1999; Davis, 2002; Dees, 1998;
Johnson, 2002). Further, Bornstein (1996: 36) describes the social entrepreneur as a person “… who is totally possessed by his or
her vision for change.” To bring about broad-based changes in how social wealth is created and distributed, the motivation to
develop and introduce novel solutions frequently requires egoistic actions that match the breadth of the reforms desired. Social
Constructionists might manipulate or even coerce others to gain their support, compliance or acquiescence. As a result,
opportunistic and coercive behaviors might become a serious problem in the ventures that Social Constructionists lead. Such
behaviors could be wrong even if they lead to greater social wealth (Kant, 1964).
Drayton (2002) also suggests Social Constructionists must possess the requisite “ethical ﬁber” to serve as positive role models,
exude conﬁdence, as well as build support and collaboration if they are to be successful in scaling up their operations. The need for
greater resources to accomplish their objectives, matched with the goal of transforming social institutions, may prompt some
Social Constructionists to cut ethical corners (Barendsen and Gardner, 2004). For instance, some may spin the truth in order to gain
support and obtain funding, or even fail to refund money received from donors. Because Social Constructionists are so committed
to a chosen venture or higher ideal, the stakes are especially high. This could cause them to engage in unethical behaviors,
especially when the fate of their ventures lies in the balance. Ethically, it matters greatly how entrepreneurs go about achieving
total wealth, not only the beneﬁts they achieve. This is especially salient in social ventures where entrepreneurs typically engage
others who share a common concern for social good, and attempt to retain their support and enthusiasm for the chosen course of
action.
Egoism, coupled with the lack of effective controls, can accentuate these questionable behaviors. An example of some of the
ethical issues Social Constructionists may encounter when market mechanisms and governance are limited is Farm Aid, a social
venture that provides grants and support programs to US farmers. Though some critics point to the relatively low percentage of
revenues ultimately given to farmers in the form of grants (28% in 2004), founders of the organization (e.g., such as Willie Nelson)
believe the venture helps increase public awareness about the plight of the US farmer (George, 2005). Such disagreements about
the mission of the venture can have other dramatic impacts upon its activities and performance. For example, while a 2003 Farm
Aid concert generated over $1 million in revenues, expenses to hold the event ran over $850,000, leaving barely over $150,000 in

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

529

proﬁt. This is a small ﬁgure given that all artists paid their own expenses and performed for free. Divergent social ambitions, mixed
with inadequate oversight, can place some social ventures in the difﬁcult position of having to justify their performance and
answer charges of negligence from their donors and other stakeholders.
4.3. Social Engineers
These entrepreneurs are the most driven of the three types portrayed in this article. They focus on introducing revolutionary
change and deliberately upsetting the equilibrium within their environment. This is typically viewed as subversive. When these
entrepreneurs encounter situations where societal structures, institutions, and norms have become ossiﬁed, some may ﬁnd rule
breaking essential to introducing innovation and reform (Etzioni, 1987; Bhide and Stevenson, 1990). This contradicts the known
ethical principle that the end cannot, and should not, justify the means.
In their fervent commitment to their chosen causes, Social Engineers may also place their egos and needs ahead of their
ventures or the constituents they serve. Undoubtedly, many Social Engineers are motivated by the highest ideals of “doing good”.
But, what happens when this is not the case, or when the values of the Social Engineer differ radically from prevailing societal
morals and norms? Champions of radical change and leaders of social movements are often individualistic and may even hold
values that others consider toxic to society at large. Some of these entrepreneurs may even be socially deviant, manipulative and
unrelenting in the pursuit of their own idiosyncratic agendas. The changes these entrepreneurs champion to remedy existing
problems can also lead to a new set of societal challenges that reduce or even harm public good.
Social Engineers usually marshal great resources and create momentum for wide- ranging societal change. They are usually
driven by a missionary zeal and unbounded belief in the righteousness of their causes. Sometimes, it takes this dedication to
transform a community or society. There are times, however, when these behaviors create, intensify and perpetuate social
tensions, conﬂicts and acrimony rather than harmony and prosperity. Given their passion and charisma, monitoring and
constraining visionary Social Engineers can be a challenge.
5. Discussion
In this article, we have deﬁned social entrepreneurship, explained the major reasons for the growing interest in it, deﬁned it,
and identiﬁed three major social entrepreneurial types. We have also discussed some key ethical issues that arise from the practice
of social entrepreneurship. We will now reﬂect on the managerial implications of our typology and identify directions for future
research.
5.1. Managerial implications
Our article has several implications for the management of social ventures and the various stakeholders they serve and/or rely
on for support. Though we have discussed the practices of several successful social entrepreneurs, efforts to create social wealth or
launch new social ventures are risky activities. However, social innovation runs the risk of social upheaval. There is also the
possibility that the ventures and innovations they initiate might not create social wealth. As we have noted, accepted, reliable and
valid measures of social wealth do not currently exist. While the aggressive actions of business entrepreneurs are often offset by
the reality of market mechanisms, social entrepreneurs may operate in a realm with fewer checks and balances.
Our article encourages social entrepreneurs to keep the goal of maximizing social wealth in mind and urges them not to get
caught up in the elegance or novelty of their own creation. Further, even though the pursuit of opportunities to increase income
might be alluring, these activities should not be undertaken if they diminish the social venture's ability to serve its constituency.
Such an inversion of means and ends raises serious ethical concerns, particularly for those volunteers and ﬁnancial donors who
wish to support an organization's social mission, rather than the technical operations.
The lack of oversight and the potential for unethical actions should also encourage social entrepreneurs to adopt effective
mechanisms that help to monitor their ventures. Social entrepreneurs share many of the same characteristics as their for-proﬁt
cohorts — risk-taking, proactiveness and independence. As such, some social entrepreneurs might be susceptible to taking
unnecessary risks. Or, they may pursue innovation merely to create change, as opposed to enhancing social wealth. Social
entrepreneurs should consider creating external advisory boards and implement effective governance mechanisms to make sure
their ventures do not fall victim to the ethical abuses we have analyzed earlier.
Furthermore, given these fundamental differences in the strategic intent and organizational needs of particular social
entrepreneurs, we have underscored the need for distinct managerial styles in each of the three types. The three different social
entrepreneurs we discussed may experience similar hurdles just as entrepreneurial organizations struggle with issues of growth
and evolution from a new venture towards a more professional organization. For instance, Social Bricoleurs may operate very
informal ventures. Scaling up and operating larger organizations requires Social Constructionists to develop much more complex
and formal managerial systems. Social Engineers, however, may beneﬁt more from charismatic leadership in garnering public
attention and galvanizing support for their ventures' missions.
This article also reinforces the importance of opportunity recognition in the realm of social entrepreneurship. It encourages
social service providers and nascent social entrepreneurs to explore and integrate models of discovery and entrepreneurship into
their operations. The pursuit of earned income-generating opportunities, new revenue streams, or innovative means of creating
social wealth could be enhanced by adopting a more entrepreneurial mindset within an organization. Given the shrinking pool of

530

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

public funding, all social service organizations need to consider alternative means of support or novel ways to create social wealth.
Lessons learned from the competitive sector might prove invaluable to social ventures' sustained viability.

5.2. Future research directions
Our article highlights a further need to articulate the domain of social entrepreneurship and outlines several criteria by which
this delineation could be achieved. Clearly, deﬁnitions of social entrepreneurship should incorporate both economic and social
outcomes. Further, given that the concept of social wealth is key to our deﬁnition, future researchers should clarify the meaning
and dimensions of this concept. Researchers could integrate insights from research on organizational effectiveness (Cameron and
Whetten, 1983; Herman, 1990) as they measure social costs and beneﬁts. The deﬁnition of opportunity costs also requires
thoughtful attention. These costs typically involve entrepreneurs' foregone opportunities as well as any missed opportunities to
employ these resources differently to create greater social wealth. Future deﬁnitions of opportunity costs should also consider
social costs arising elsewhere.
Social entrepreneurs and their ventures need to be studied closely in future research. Our deﬁnition of social entrepreneurship
underscores the various actions and processes followed to discover and exploit opportunities. It also captures the motivation and
personality of those individuals who establish these ventures. By examining these motivations and actions, future researchers can
capture the variety of social ventures. Some ventures are simple replications of existing organizations. Others consolidate, revamp
and replace obsolete organizational forms. Social ventures also vary in their scale and scope, depending on the magnitude of the
social opportunities pursued (Zahra et al., in press). Documenting these differences, as well as their causes and implications for the
types of opportunities pursued, can also enrich our understanding of the effect of different organizational forms on the success of
social entrepreneurship.
The antecedents of social entrepreneurship also require careful analysis which might include societal, organizational and
individual variables. The various interactions among these variables could also spark the recognition of different social
opportunities and determine how entrepreneurs exploit them. As research matures, greater attention to theory building on the
antecedents of different social ventures becomes a priority. Exploring the milieu within which these entrepreneurs exist, how they
function, and why their ventures succeed or fail can enrich theory building on social ventures.
Future researchers would also beneﬁt from studying the contextual variables that inﬂuence different social entrepreneurial
types. The three types we have discussed in this article could reﬂect the effective roles social entrepreneurship plays at different
points in the life of their ventures. They might signal the growing maturity of social entrepreneurs in learning how to assemble
resources and pursue different opportunities. The personality of the entrepreneur, the social mission to be accomplished, and the
muniﬁcence of the external environment might also inﬂuence the selection of a given type.
Ethical transgressions can hamper entrepreneurs' ability to create social wealth. As a result, the ethical issues associated with
different social entrepreneurial types deserve thoughtful analysis. Under what conditions are these different entrepreneurs willing
to cut ethical corners? How can social ventures develop early warning systems of such ethical violations? How can new social
ventures curb their founders' potential unethical transgressions? These questions underscore the importance of research on social
entrepreneurship and its ethics. We hope our article inspires others to pursue research on these important issues.

References
Acumen, 2007. http://blog.acumenfund.org/2007/05/10/two-pronged-social-impact/ Accessed 1 October, 2007.
Alexander, J.A., Weiner, B.J., 1998. The adoption of the corporate governance model by non-proﬁt organizations. Nonproﬁt Management and Leadership 8 (3),
223–242.
Alford, S.H., Brown, L.D., Letts, C.W., 2004. Social entrepreneurship: leadership that facilitates societal transformation. Working Paper, Center for Public Leadership.
InJohn F. Kennedy School of Government.
Austin, J., Stevenson, H., Wei-Skillern, J., 2006. Social and commercial entrepreneurship: same, different or both? Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice 30 (1), 1–22.
Baker, T., Nelson, R., 2005. Creating something from nothing: resource construction through entrepreneurial bricolage. Administrative Science Quarterly 50,
329–366.
Baker, T., Gedjlovic, E., Lubatkin, M., 2005. A framework for comparing entrepreneurial processes across nations. Journal of International Business Studies 36,
492–504.
Barendsen, L., Gardner, H., 2004. Is the social entrepreneur a new type of leader. Leader to Leader 34, 43–50 (Fall).
Bernasek, A., Stanﬁeld, J.R., 1997. The Grameen Bank as progressive institutional adjustment. Journal of Economic Issues 31 (2), 359–366.
Bhide, A., Stevenson, H.H., 1990. Why be honest if honesty doesn't pay. Harvard Business Review 68 (5), 2–9.
Bornstein, D., 1996. The price of a dream: The idea of the Grameen Bank and the idea that is helping the poor to change their lives. Simon & Schuster, New York.
Bornstein, D., 2004. How to change the world: Social entrepreneurship and the power of ideas. Oxford University Press.
Brinkerhoff, P., 2001. Why you need to be more entrepreneurial — an how to get started. Nonproﬁt World 19 (6), 12–15.
Brinkerhoff, D.W., Brinkerhoff, J.M., 2004. Partnerships between international donors and non-governmental development organizations: opportunities and
constraints. International Review of Administrative Sciences 70, 253–270.
Brown, L.D., Moore, M.H., 2001. Accountability, strategy, and international nongovernmental organizations. Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 30, 569–587.
Cameron, K., Whetten, D. (Eds.), 1983. Organizational effectiveness: A comparison of multiple models. InAcademic Press, New York.
Carney, M., in press. Agentic variation in institutional entrepreneurship. Unpublished manuscript John Molson School of Business, Concordia University, Montreal.
Carney, M., Gedajlovic, E., 2002. The co-evolution of institutional environments and organizational strategies: The rise of family business groups in the ASEAN
region. Organization Studies 23 (1).
Chell, E., 2007. Social enterprise and entrepreneurship. International Small Business Journal 25 (1), 5–26.
Conner, K.R., Prahalad, C.K., 1996. A resource-based theory of the ﬁrm: knowledge versus opportunism. Organization Science 7, 477–501.
Cox, A., Healey, J., 1998. Promises to the poor: the record of European development agencies. Poverty Brieﬁngs, vol. 1. Overseas Development Institute, London.
Cyert, R.A., March, J.G., 1963. A behaviourial theory of the ﬁrm. Prentice–Hall, Inc, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

531

Davis, S., 2002. Social entrepreneurship: Towards an entrepreneurial culture for social and economic development. . Prepared for Youth Employment Summit Sept.
7–11. http://www.ashoka.org/global/yespaper.pdf.
Dees, J.G., 1998. Enterprising nonproﬁts. Harvard Business Review 76 (1), 55–66.
Dees, J.G., Anderson, B.B., Wei-Skillern, J., 2004. Scaling social impact. Stanford Social Innovation Review 1, 24–32.
Dichter, T., 1999. Non-government organisations (NGOs) in microﬁnance: past, present and future — an essay. Case Studies in Microﬁnance. World Bank Sustainable
Banking Project.
Dorado, S., 2006. Social entrepreneurial ventures: different values so different process of creations, no? Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship 319–343.
Drayton, B., 2002. The citizen sector: becoming as entrepreneurial and competitive as business. California Management Review 44 (3), 120–132.
Eikenberry, A.M., Kluver, J.D., 2004. The marketization of the nonproﬁt sector: civil society at risk? Public Administration Review 64, 132–140.
Etzioni, A., 1987. Entrepreneurship, adaptation and legitimation. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 8, 175–189.
Ferraro, G., 2000. Sixteen Decisions. . www.geraldpeary.com/reviews/stuv/sixteen_decisions.html. accessed December 14, 2008.
Forbes, D.P., 1998. Measuring the unmeasurable: empirical studies of nonproﬁt organization effectiveness from 1977 to 1997. Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector
Quarterly 27, 183–202.
Foster, W., Bradach, J., 2005. Should nonproﬁts seek proﬁts? Harvard Business Review 83, 92–100.
Fowler, A., 2000. NGDOs as a moment in history: beyond aid to social entrepreneurship or civic innovation? Third World Quarterly 21 (4), 637–654.
Fuqua School. 2005. http://www.fuqua.duke.edu/centers/case/
Gangemi, J. 2005. Microcredit missionary. Business Week (December 26), 20.
George, J. 2005. Farmer Aid expenses eat away at donations. Chicago Tribune, September 17.
Glaeser, E.L., 2002. The governance of not-for-proﬁt ﬁrms. NBER Working Papers 8921. InNational Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Goerke, J., 2003. Taking the quantum leap: nonproﬁts are now in business. An Australian perspective. International Journal of Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector
Marketing 8 (4), 317–327.
Grameen, 2007. http://www.grameen-info.org/bank/the16.html, Accessed 1 October, 2007.
Grant, R.M., 1996. Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal 17, 109–122.
Harding, R., 2004. Social enterprise: the new economic engine? Business and Strategy Review 15 (4), 39–43.
Hayek, F.A., 1945. The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review 35, 519–530.
Hemingway, C.A., 2005. Personal values as a catalyst for corporate social entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Ethics 60 (3), 233–249.
Herman, R., 1990. Methodological issues in studying the effectiveness of nongovernmental and nonproﬁt organizations. Nonproﬁt and Voluntary Sector Quarterly
19, 293–306.
Hulme, D., 1990. Can the Grameen Bank be replicated? Recent experiments in Malaysia, Malawi, and Sri Lanka. Development Policy Review 8, 287–300.
Johnson, S., 2002. Social entrepreneurship literature review. Paper produced for the Canadian Centre for Social Entrepreneurship.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica 47, 263–290.
Kant, I., 1964. Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals. Harper and Row Publishers, Inc.
Kaplan, R.S., 2001. Strategic performance measurement and management in nonproﬁt organizations. Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership 11, 353–370.
Kirzner, I., 1973. Competition and entrepreneurship. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Knight, F.H., 1921. Risk, uncertainty, and proﬁt. Houghton Mifﬂin Company, Boston, MA.
Kuratko, D.F., Goldsby, M.G., 2004. Corporate entrepreneurs or rogue middle managers: a framework for ethical corporate entrepreneurship. Journal of Business
Ethics 55 (1), 3–30.
Lasprogata, G.A., Cotton, M.N., 2003. Contemplating enterprise: the business and legal challenges of social entrepreneurship. American Business Law Journal 41,
67–113.
Leadbetter, C., 1997. The rise of social entrepreneurship. Demos, London.
Levi-Strauss, C., 1966. The savage mind. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London.
Longnecker, J., McKinney, J., Moore, C., 1988. Egoism and independence: entrepreneurial ethics. Organizational Dynamics 16 (3), 64–72.
MacMillan, I.A. 2005. http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/index.cfm?fa=viewfeature&id=766.
Mair, J., Marti, I., 2004. Social entrepreneurship: what are we talking about? A framework for future research. Barcelona: IESE Business School Working Paper No.
546.
Mair, J., Martí, I., 2006a. Social entrepreneurship research: a source of explanation, prediction, and delight. Journal of World Business 41 (1), 36–44.
Mair, J., Marti, I., 2006b. Social entrepreneurship in and around institutional voids. Paper presented at the University of Minnesota Conference on Ethics &
Entrepreneurship.
Mair, J., Noboa, E., 2003. Social entrepreneurship: how intentions to create a social enterprise get formed. Barcelona: IESE Business School Working Paper No. 521.
Martin, R.J., Osberg, S., 2007. Social Entrepreneurship: The Case for a Deﬁnition, Stanford Social Innovation Review, pp. 29–39. Spring.
Mintzberg, H., Simons, R., Basu, K., 2002. Beyond selﬁshness. Sloan Management Review 44 (1), 67–74.
Mort, G., Weerawardena, J., Carnegie, K., 2002. Social entrepreneurship: towards conceptualization and measurement. American Marketing Association Conference
Proceedings 13, 5.
Nelson, R.R., Winter, S., 1982. An evolutionary theory of economic change. The Belknap Press of Harvard University, London.
Nirmalan, N.K., Katz, J., Robin, A.L., Krishnadas, R., Ramakrishnan, R., Thulasiraj, R.D., Tielsch, J., 2004. Utilisation of Eye Care Services in Rural South India: The
Aravind Comprehensive Eye Survey.
Novogratz, J. 2005. Talks Jacqueline Novogratz: Investing in Africa's own solutions video on http://www.ted.com/index.php/talks/view/id/91.
NYU Stern, 2005. http://w4.stern.nyu.edu/berkley/social.cfm.
Parsons, T., 1971. The system of modern societies. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Pearce, J., Doh, J.P., 2005. The high impact of collaborative social initiatives. MIT Sloan Management Review 46, 329–339.
Peredo, A.M., McLean, M., 2006. Social entrepreneurship: a critical review of the concept. Journal of World Business 41, 56–65.
Pitt, M., Khandker, S.R., 1998. The impact of group-based credit programs on poor households in Bangladesh: does the gender of participants matter? Journal of
Political Economy 106 (5), 958–996.
Pfeffer, J., Salancik, G.R., 1978. The external control of organizations: A resource dependence perspective. Harper & Row, New York, NY.
Prabhu, G.N., 1999. Social entrepreneurship leadership. Career Development International 4 (3), 140–145.
Prahalad, C.K., 2004. The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty Through Proﬁts. Wahrton School Publishing, New Jersey.
Prahalad, C.K., 2005. The fortune at the bottom of the pyramid: eradicating poverty through proﬁts. Wharton School Publishing, Upper Saddle, NJ.
Rawhouser, H., 2007. Going Beyond the Institutions in Developing Countries. InWorld Universities Network Conference, Chicago, Illinois. October 4–6, 2007.
Reis, T., 1999. Unleashing the New Resources and Entrepreneurship for the Common Good: a Scan, Synthesis and Scenario for Action. W.K. Kellogg Foundation,
Battle Creek, MI.
Rogaly, B., 1996. Micro-ﬁnance evangelism, “destitute women”, and the hard selling of a new anti-poverty formula. Development in Practice 6, 100–112.
Said Business School. 2005. http://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/skoll/.
Salamon, L.M., 1999. America's nonproﬁt sector: A primer. The Foundation Center, New York, NY.
Schreiner, M., 2003. A cost-effectiveness analysis of the Grameen Bank of Bangladesh. Development Policy Review 21, 357–382.
Schumpeter, J.A., 1934. The theory of economic development. Oxford University Press, London.
Schumpeter, J.A., 1942. Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. Harper and Brothers, New York.
Schwab Foundation. 2005. http://www.schwabfound.org.
Shane, S., Venkataraman, S., 2000. The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research. Academy of Management Review 25, 217–226.
Shaw, E., 2004. Marketing in the social enterprise context: is it entrepreneurial? Qualitative Marketing Research: an International Journal 7 (3), 194–205.
Spear, R., 2006. Social entrepreneurship: a different model? International Journal of Social Economics 33 (5/6), 399–410.

532

S.A. Zahra et al. / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 519–532

Tan, W.-L., Williams, J., Tan, T.-M., 2005. Deﬁning the ‘social’ in ‘social entrepreneurship’: altruism and entrepreneurship. International Entrepreneurship and
Management Journal 1, 353–365.
Taub, R.P., 1998. Making the adaptation across cultures and societies: a report on an attempt to clone the Grameen Bank in Southern Arkansas. Journal of
Developmental Entrepreneurship 3 (1), 53–69.
Teegen, H., Doh, J.P., Vachani, S., 2004. The importance of nongovernmental organization (NGOs) in global governance and value creation: an international business
research agenda. Journal of International Business Studies 35 (6), 463–483.
Thake, S., Zadek, S., 1997. Practical people, noble causes. How to support community based social entrepreneurs. New Economic Foundation.
Thomas, J.J., 1995. Replicating the Grameen Bank—the Latin American experience. Small Enterprise Development 6 (2), 16–26.
Thompson, J., Doherty, B., 2006. The diverse world of social enterprise: a collection of social enterprise stories. International Journal of Social Economics 33 (5/6),
399–410.
Thompson, J., Alvy, G., Lees, A., 2000. Social entrepreneurship — a new look at the people and the potential. Management Decision 38, 328–338.
Waddock, S.A., Post, J.E., 1995. Catalytic alliances for social problem solving. Human Relations 48 (8), 951–973.
Wahid, A.N., 1994. The Grameen Bank and poverty alleviation in Bangladesh: theory, evidence and limitations. The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
53, 1–16.
Wall Street Journal. 1998. Microcredit arrives in Africa, but can it match Asian success? September 29, Section A, p.1.
Weick, K.E., 1993. The collapse of sensemaking in organizations: the Mann Gulch disaster. Administrative Science Quarterly 38, 628–652.
Wolverton, B. 2003. Surviving tough times. Chronicle on Philanthropy, October 30.
Wood, J.S., 2005. Development and present state of entrepreneurship in product and assets markets. Austrian Scholars Conference, Auburn, Alabama.
Yunus, M., 1998. Poverty alleviation: is economics any help? Lessons from the Grameen Bank experience. Journal of International Affairs 52.1, 47–65.
Yunus, M., 2003. Banker to the poor: Micro-lending and the battle against poverty (2nd ed.). Public Affairs, New York.
Zahra, S.A., Dess, G.G., 2001. Entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research: encouraging dialog and debate. Academy of Management Review 26 (1), 8–10.
Zahra, S., Ireland, D., Guiterrez, I., Hitt, M., 2000. Privatization and entrepreneurial transformation: a review and research agenda. Academy of Management Review
25, 509–524.
Zahra, S., Rawhouser, H., Bhawe, N., Neubaum, D. & Hayton, J. in press. Globalization of` Social Entrepreneurship. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal.

